Thank you, Dick Durbin. You make us all proud.
On behalf of the great state of Illinois, crossroads of a nation, Land of Lincoln, let me express
my deepest gratitude for the privilege of addressing this convention.
Tonight is a particular honor for me because, let’s face it, my presence on this stage is pretty
unlikely. My father was a foreign student, born and raised in a small village in Kenya. He grew
up herding goats, went to school in a tin-roof shack. His father -- my grandfather -- was a
cook, a domestic servant to the British.
But my grandfather had larger dreams for his son. Through hard work and perseverance my
father got a scholarship to study in a magical place, America, that shone as a beacon of
freedom and opportunity to so many who had come before.
While studying here, my father met my mother. She was born in a town on the other side of
the world, in Kansas. Her father worked on oil rigs and farms through most of the Depression.
The day after Pearl Harbor my grandfather signed up for duty; joined Patton’s army, marched
across Europe. Back home, my grandmother raised a baby and went to work on a bomber
assembly line. After the war, they studied on the G.I. Bill, bought a house through F.H.A., and
later moved west all the way to Hawaii in search of opportunity. And they, too, had big
dreams for their daughter. A common dream, born of two continents.
My parents shared not only an improbable love, they shared an abiding faith in the
possibilities of this nation. They would give me an African name, Barack, or ”blessed,”
believing that in a tolerant America your name is no barrier to success. They imagined me
going to the best schools in the land, even though they weren’t rich, because in a generous
America you don’t have to be rich to achieve your potential.
They're both passed away now. And yet, I know that on this night they look down on me with
great pride.
They stand here -- and I stand here -- today, grateful for the diversity of my heritage, aware
that my parents’ dreams live on in my two precious daughters. I stand here knowing that my
story is part of the larger American story, that I owe a debt to all of those who came before
me, and that, in no other country on earth, is my story even possible.
Tonight, we gather to affirm the greatness of our Nation -- not because of the height of our
skyscrapers, or the power of our military, or the size of our economy. Our pride is based on a
very simple premise, summed up in a declaration made over two hundred years ago:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, that among these are Life,
Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.
That is the true genius of America, a faith in simple dreams, an insistence on small miracles;
that we can tuck in our children at night and know that they are fed and clothed and safe from
harm; that we can say what we think, write what we think, without hearing a sudden knock
on the door; that we can have an idea and start our own business without paying a bribe; that
we can participate in the political process without fear of retribution, and that our votes will be
counted -- at least most of the time.
This year, in this election we are called to reaffirm our values and our commitments, to hold
them against a hard reality and see how we're measuring up to the legacy of our forbearers
and the promise of future generations.
And fellow Americans, Democrats, Republicans, Independents, I say to you tonight: We have
more work to do -- more work to do for the workers I met in Galesburg, Illinois, who are
losing their union jobs at the Maytag plant that’s moving to Mexico, and now are having to
compete with their own children for jobs that pay seven bucks an hour; more to do for the
father that I met who was losing his job and choking back the tears, wondering how he would
pay 4500 dollars a month for the drugs his son needs without the health benefits that he
counted on; more to do for the young woman in East St. Louis, and thousands more like her,
who has the grades, has the drive, has the will, but doesn’t have the money to go to college.
Now, don’t get me wrong. The people I meet -- in small towns and big cities, in diners and
office parks -- they don’t expect government to solve all their problems. They know they have
to work hard to get ahead, and they want to. Go into the collar counties around Chicago, and
people will tell you they don’t want their tax money wasted, by a welfare agency or by the
Pentagon. Go into any inner city neighborhood, and folks will tell you that government alone
can’t teach our kids to learn; they know that parents have to teach, that children can’t
achieve unless we raise their expectations and turn off the television sets and eradicate the
slander that says a black youth with a book is acting white. They know those things.
People don't expect government to solve all their problems. But they sense, deep in their
bones, that with just a slight change in priorities, we can make sure that every child in
America has a decent shot at life, and that the doors of opportunity remain open to all.
They know we can do better. And they want that choice.
In this election, we offer that choice. Our Party has chosen a man to lead us who embodies
the best this country has to offer. And that man is John Kerry.
John Kerry understands the ideals of community, faith, and service because they’ve defined
his life. From his heroic service to Vietnam, to his years as a prosecutor and lieutenant
governor, through two decades in the United States Senate, he's devoted himself to this
country. Again and again, we’ve seen him make tough choices when easier ones were
available.
His values and his record affirm what is best in us. John Kerry believes in an America where
hard work is rewarded; so instead of offering tax breaks to companies shipping jobs overseas,
he offers them to companies creating jobs here at home.
John Kerry believes in an America where all Americans can afford the same health coverage
our politicians in Washington have for themselves.
John Kerry believes in energy independence, so we aren’t held hostage to the profits of oil
companies, or the sabotage of foreign oil fields.
John Kerry believes in the Constitutional freedoms that have made our country the envy of
the world, and he will never sacrifice our basic liberties, nor use faith as a wedge to divide us.
And John Kerry believes that in a dangerous world war must be an option sometimes, but it
should never be the first option.
You know, awhile back I met a young man named Shamus in a V.F.W. Hall in East Moline,
Illinois. He was a good-looking kid -- six two, six three, clear eyed, with an easy smile. He told
me he’d joined the Marines and was heading to Iraq the following week.
And as I listened to him explain why he’d enlisted, the absolute faith he had in our country
and its leaders, his devotion to duty and service, I thought this young man was all that any of
us might ever hope for in a child.
But then I asked myself, "Are we serving Shamus as well as he is serving us?"
I thought of the 900 men and women -- sons and daughters, husbands and wives, friends and
neighbors, who won’t be returning to their own hometowns. I thought of the families I’ve met
who were struggling to get by without a loved one’s full income, or whose loved ones had
returned with a limb missing or nerves shattered, but still lacked long-term health benefits
because they were Reservists.
When we send our young men and women into harm’s way, we have a solemn obligation not
to fudge the numbers or shade the truth about why they’re going, to care for their families
while they’re gone, to tend to the soldiers upon their return, and to never ever go to war
without enough troops to win the war, secure the peace, and earn the respect of the world.
Now let me be clear. Let me be clear. We have real enemies in the world. These enemies must
be found. They must be pursued. And they must be defeated. John Kerry knows this. And just
as Lieutenant Kerry did not hesitate to risk his life to protect the men who served with him in
Vietnam, President Kerry will not hesitate one moment to use our military might to keep
America safe and secure.
John Kerry believes in America. And he knows that it’s not enough for just some of us to
prosper -- for alongside our famous individualism, there’s another ingredient in the American
saga, a belief that we’re all connected as one people. If there is a child on the south side of
Chicago who can’t read, that matters to me, even if it’s not my child. If there is a senior
citizen somewhere who can’t pay for their prescription drugs, and having to choose between
medicine and the rent, that makes my life poorer, even if it’s not my grandparent. If there’s
an Arab American family being rounded up without benefit of an attorney or due process, that
threatens my civil liberties.
It is that fundamental belief: I am my brother’s keeper. I am my sister’s keeper that makes
this country work. It’s what allows us to pursue our individual dreams and yet still come
together as one American family.
E pluribus unum: "Out of many, one."
Now even as we speak, there are those who are preparing to divide us -- the spin masters,
the negative ad peddlers who embrace the politics of "anything goes." Well, I say to them
tonight, there is not a liberal America and a conservative America -- there is the United States
of America. There is not a Black America and a White America and Latino America and Asian
America -- there’s the United States of America.
The pundits like to slice-and-dice our country into red states and blue states; red states for
Republicans, blue states for Democrats. But I’ve got news for them, too. We worship an
"awesome God" in the blue states, and we don’t like federal agents poking around in our
libraries in the red states. We coach Little League in the blue states and yes, we’ve got some
gay friends in the red states. There are patriots who opposed the war in Iraq and there are
patriots who supported the war in Iraq. We are one people, all of us pledging allegiance to the
stars and stripes, all of us defending the United States of America.
In the end, that’s what this election is about. Do we participate in a politics of cynicism or do
we participate in a politics of hope?
John Kerry calls on us to hope. John Edwards calls on us to hope.
I’m not talking about blind optimism here -- the almost willful ignorance that thinks
unemployment will go away if we just don’t think about it, or the health care crisis will solve
itself if we just ignore it. That’s not what I’m talking about. I’m talking about something more
substantial. It’s the hope of slaves sitting around a fire singing freedom songs; the hope of
immigrants setting out for distant shores; the hope of a young naval lieutenant bravely
patrolling the Mekong Delta; the hope of a millworker’s son who dares to defy the odds; the
hope of a skinny kid with a funny name who believes that America has a place for him, too.
Hope in the face of difficulty. Hope in the face of uncertainty. The audacity of hope!
In the end, that is God’s greatest gift to us, the bedrock of this nation. A belief in things not
seen. A belief that there are better days ahead.
I believe that we can give our middle class relief and provide working families with a road to
opportunity.
I believe we can provide jobs to the jobless, homes to the homeless, and reclaim young
people in cities across America from violence and despair.
I believe that we have a righteous wind at our backs and that as we stand on the crossroads
of history, we can make the right choices, and meet the challenges that face us.
America! Tonight, if you feel the same energy that I do, if you feel the same urgency that I
do, if you feel the same passion that I do, if you feel the same hopefulness that I do -- if we
do what we must do, then I have no doubt that all across the country, from Florida to Oregon,
from Washington to Maine, the people will rise up in November, and John Kerry will be sworn
in as President, and John Edwards will be sworn in as Vice President, and this country will
reclaim its promise, and out of this long political darkness a brighter day will come.
Thank you very much everybody. God bless you. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. President; Ladies and Gentlemen of the Senate: 
I have to say that I didn't anticipate speaking today, but the importance, I think, of this issue 
is one in which I feel it's important for me to address this body.
You know, during the election I had the occasion of meeting a woman who had supported me 
in my campaign. And she decided to come to shake my hand and take a photograph. A 
wonderful woman, she wasn't asking for anything, and I was very grateful that she took time 
to come by. It was a[n] unexceptional moment except for the fact that she was born in 1894. 
And her name was Marguerite Lewis, an African­American woman who had been born in
Louisiana, born in the shadow of slavery, born at a time when lynchings were commonplace, 
born at a time when African­Americans and women could not vote.
And yet, over the course of decades she had participated in broadening our democracy and 
ensuring that, in fact, at some point, if not herself, then her children and her grandchildren
and her great­grandchildren would be in a position in which they could, too, call themselves 
citizens of the United States and make certain that this Government works not just on behalf 
of the mighty and the powerful but also on behalf of people like her.
And so the fact that she voted and that her vote was counted in this election was of supreme 
importance to her and it is the memory of talking to her and shaking her hand that causes me 
to rise on this occasion. 
I am absolutely convinced that the President of the United States, George Bush, won this 
election. I also believe that he got more votes in Ohio. I think, as has already been said by 
some of the speakers in this body, this is not an issue in which we are challenging the 
outcome of the election. And I think it's important for us to separate out the issue of the 
election outcome with the election process. 
I was not in this body four years ago, but what I observed as a voter, as a citizen of Illinois 
four years ago, were troubling evidence of the fact that not every vote was being counted.
And I think that it is unfortunate four years later that we continue to see circumstances in
which people who believe that they have the right to vote ­­ who show up at the polls ­­ still
continue to confront the sort of problems that have been documented as taking place, not just
in Ohio, but [in] places all across the country. 
I would strongly urge that this Chamber, as well as the House of Representatives, take it upon
itself once and for all to reform this system. There is no reason, at a time when we have 
enormous battles taking place ideologically all across the globe, at a time when we're try to
make certain that we encourage democracy in Iraq and Afghanistan and other places 
throughout the world, that we have the legitimacy of our elections challenged, rightly or 
wrongly, by people who are not certain as to whether our processes are fair and just. This is 
something that we can fix. We have experts on both sides of the aisle who know how to fix it. 
What we've lacked is the political will. 
I would strongly urge that, in a circumstance in which too many voters have stood in long 
lines for hours, in which too many voters have cast votes on machines that jam or malfunction
or suck the votes without a trace, in which too many voters try to register to vote only to
discover that their names don't appear on the roles, or that partisan political interests and 
those that serve them have worked hard to throw up every barrier to recognize them as 
lawful, in which too many voters will know that there are different elections for different parts 
of the country and that these differences turn shamefully on differences of wealth or of race, 
in which too many voters have to contend with state officials, servants of the public, who put
partisan or personal political interests ahead of the public in administering our elections ­­ in
such circumstances, we have an obligation to fix the problem. 
And I have to add that this is not a problem unique to this election, and it is not a partisan
problem. Keep in mind, I come from Cook County, from Chicago, in which there is a long 
record of these kinds of problems taking place and disadvantaging Republicans as well as 
Democrats. So I would ask that all of us rise up and use this occasion to amend this problem. 
Thank you.
Good morning President Taylor, Board of Trustees, faculty, parents, family, friends, the
community of Galesburg, the class of 1955 -- which I understand was out partying last night,
and yet still showed up here on time -- and most of all, the Class of 2005. Congratulations on
your graduation, and thank you -- thank you for the honor of allowing me to be a part of it.
Thank you also, Mr. President, for this honorary degree. It was only a couple of years ago that
I stopped paying my student loans in law school. Had I known it was this easy, I would have
ran [sic] for the United States Senate earlier.
You know, it has been about six months now since you sent me to Washington as your United
States Senator. I recognize that not all of you voted for me, so for those of you muttering
under your breath "I didn’t send you anywhere," that's ok too. Maybe we’ll hold -- What do
you call it? -- a little Pumphandle after the ceremony. Change your mind for the next time.
It has been a fascinating journey thus far. Each time I walk onto the Senate floor, I'm
reminded of the history, for good and for ill, that has been made there. But there have been a
few surreal moments.
For example, I remember the day before I was sworn in, myself and my staff, we decided to
hold a press conference in our office. Now, keep in mind that I am ranked 99th in seniority. I
was proud that I wasn’t ranked dead last until I found out that it’s just because Illinois is
bigger than Colorado. So I’m 99th in seniority, and all the reporters are crammed into the tiny
transition office that I have, which is right next to the janitor’s closet in the basement of the
Dirksen Office Building. It’s my first day in the building, I have not taken a single vote, I have
not introduced one bill, had not even sat down in my desk, and this very earnest reporter
raises his hand and says:
“Senator Obama, what is your place in history?”
I did what you just did, which is laugh out loud. I said, "place in history?" I thought he was
kidding. At that point, I wasn’t even sure the other Senators would save a place for me at the
cool kids’ table.
But as I was thinking about the words to share with this class, about what’s next, about
what’s possible, and what opportunities lay ahead, I actually think it’s not a bad question for
you, the class of 2005, to ask yourselves: What will be your place in history?
In other eras, across distant lands, this question could be answered with relative ease and
certainty. As a servant in Rome, you knew you’d spend your life forced to build somebody
else’s Empire. As a peasant in 11th Century China, you knew that no matter how hard you
worked, the local warlord might come and take everything you had -- and you also knew that
famine might come knocking at the door. As a subject of King George, you knew that your
freedom of worship and your freedom to speak and to build your own life would be ultimately
limited by the throne.
And then America happened.
A place where destiny was not a destination, but a journey to be shared and shaped and
remade by people who had the gall, the temerity to believe that, against all odds, they could
form “a more perfect union” on this new frontier.
And as people around the world began to hear the tale of the lowly colonists who overthrew
an empire for the sake of an idea, they started to come. Across oceans and the ages, they
settled in Boston and Charleston, Chicago and St. Louis, Kalamazoo and Galesburg, to try and
build their own American Dream. This collective dream moved forward imperfectly -- it was
scarred by our treatment of native peoples, betrayed by slavery, clouded by the subjugation
of women, shaken by war and depression. And yet, brick by brick, rail by rail, calloused hand
by calloused hand, people kept dreaming, and building, and working, and marching, and
petitioning their government, until they made America a land where the question of our place
in history is not answered for us. It’s answered by us.
Have we failed at times? Absolutely. Will you occasionally fail when you embark on your own
American journey? You surely will. But the test is not perfection.
The true test of the American ideal is whether we’re able to recognize our failings and then
rise together to meet the challenges of our time. Whether we allow ourselves to be shaped by
events and history, or whether we act to shape them. Whether chance of birth or
circumstance decides life’s big winners and losers, or whether we build a community where, at
the very least, everyone has a chance to work hard, get ahead, and reach their dreams.
We have faced this choice before.
At the end of the Civil War, when farmers and their families began moving into the cities to
work in the big factories that were sprouting up all across America, we had to decide: Do we
do nothing and allow captains of industry and robber barons to run roughshod over the
economy and workers by competing to see who can pay the lowest wages at the worst
working conditions? Or do we try to make the system work by setting up basic rules for the
market, instituting the first public schools, busting up monopolies, letting workers organize
into unions?
We chose to act, and we rose together.
When the irrational exuberance of the Roaring Twenties came crashing down with the stock
market, we had to decide: do we follow the call of leaders who would do nothing, or the call of
a leader who, perhaps because of his physical paralysis, refused to accept political paralysis?
We chose to act -- regulating the market, putting people back to work, expanding bargaining
rights to include health care and a secure retirement -- and together we rose.
When World War II required the most massive home front mobilization in history and we
needed every single American to lend a hand, we had to decide: Do we listen to skeptics who
told us it wasn’t possible to produce that many tanks and planes? Or, did we build Roosevelt’s
Arsenal for Democracy and grow our economy even further by providing our returning heroes
with a chance to go to college and own their own home?
Again, we chose to act, and again, we rose together.
Today, at the beginning of this young century, we have to decide again. But this time, it is
your turn to choose.
Here in Galesburg, you know what this new challenge is. You’ve seen it. All of you, your first
year in college saw what happened at 9/11. It’s already been noted, the degree to which your
lives will be intertwined with the war on terrorism that currently is taking place. But what
you’ve also seen, perhaps not as spectacularly, is the fact that when you drive by the old
Maytag plant around lunchtime, no one walks out anymore.
I saw it during the campaign when I met union guys who worked at the plant for 20, 30 years
and now wonder what they’re gonna do at the age of 55 without a pension or health care;
when I met the man who’s son needed a new liver but because he’d been laid off, didn’t know
if he could afford to provide his child the care that he needed.
It’s as if someone changed the rules in the middle of the game and no wonder -- no one
bothered to tell these folks. And, in reality, the rules have changed.
It started with technology and automation that rendered entire occupations obsolete. When
was the last time anybody here stood in line for the bank teller instead of going to the ATM, or
talked to a switchboard operator? Then it continued when companies like Maytag were able to
pick up and move their factories to some under developed country where workers were a lot
cheaper than they are in the United States.
As Tom Friedman points out in his new book, The World Is Flat, over the last decade or so,
these forces -- technology and globalization -- have combined like never before. So that while
most of us have been paying attention to how much easier technology has made our own lives
-- sending e-mails back and forth on our blackberries, surfing the Web on our cell phones,
instant messaging with friends across the world -- a quiet revolution has been breaking down
barriers and connecting the world’s economies. Now business not only has the ability to move
jobs wherever there’s a factory, but wherever there’s an internet connection.
Countries like India and China realized this. They understand that they no longer need to be
just a source of cheap labor or cheap exports. They can compete with us on a global scale.
The one resource they needed were skilled, educated workers. So they started schooling their
kids earlier, longer, with a greater emphasis on math and science and technology, until their
most talented students realized they don’t have to come to America to have a decent life --
they can stay right where they are.
The result? China is graduating four times the number of engineers that the United States is
graduating. Not only are those Maytag employees competing with Chinese and Indian and
Indonesian and Mexican workers, you are too. Today, accounting firms are e-mailing your tax
returns to workers in India who will figure them out and send them back to you as fast as any
worker in Illinois or Indiana could.
When you lose your luggage in Boston at an airport, tracking it down may involve a call to an
agent in Bangalore, who will find it by making a phone call to Baltimore. Even the Associated
Press has outsourced some of their jobs to writers all over the world who can send in a story
at a click of a mouse.
As Prime Minister Tony Blair has said, in this new economy, "Talent is the 21st century
wealth." If you've got the skills, you've got the education, and you have the opportunity to
upgrade and improve both, you’ll be able to compete and win anywhere. If not, the fall will be
further and harder than it ever was before.
So what do we do about this? How does America find its way in this new, global
economy? What will our place in history be?
Like so much of the American story, once again, we face a choice. Once again, there are those
who believe that there isn’t much we can do about this as a nation. That the best idea is to
give everyone one big refund on their government -- divvy it up by individual portions, in the
form of tax breaks, hand it out, and encourage everyone to use their share to go buy their
own health care, their own retirement plan, their own child care, their own education, and so
on.
In Washington, they call this the Ownership Society. But in our past there has been another
term for it -- Social Darwinism -- every man or woman for him or herself. It’s a tempting idea,
because it doesn’t require much thought or ingenuity. It allows us to say that those whose
health care or tuition may rise faster than they can afford -- tough luck. It allows us to say to
the Maytag workers who have lost their job -- life isn’t fair. It let’s us say to the child who was
born into poverty -- pull yourself up by your bootstraps. And it is especially tempting because
each of us believes we will always be the winner in life’s lottery, that we’re the one who will be
the next Donald Trump, or at least we won’t be the chump who Donald Trump says: “You’re
fired!”
But there is a problem. It won’t work. It ignores our history. It ignores the fact that it’s been
government research and investment that made the railways possible and the internet
possible. It’s been the creation of a massive middle class, through decent wages and benefits
and public schools that allowed us all to prosper. Our economic dependence depended on
individual initiative. It depended on a belief in the free market; but it has also depended on
our sense of mutual regard for each other, the idea that everybody has a stake in the country,
that we’re all in it together and everybody’s got a shot at opportunity. That’s what’s produced
our unrivaled political stability.
And so if we do nothing in the face of globalization, more people will continue to lose their
health care. Fewer kids will be able to afford the diploma you’re about to receive.
More companies like United Airlines won’t be able to provide pensions for their employees.
And those Maytag workers will be joined in the unemployment line by any worker whose skills
can be bought and sold on the global market.
So today I’m here to tell you what most of you already know. This is not us -- the option that
I just mentioned. Doing nothing. It’s not how our story ends -- not in this country. America is
a land of big dreamers and big hopes.
It is this hope that has sustained us through revolution and civil war, depression and world
war, a struggle for civil and social rights and the brink of nuclear crisis. And it is because our
dreamers dreamed that we have emerged from each challenge more united, more prosperous,
and more admired than before.
So let’s dream. Instead of doing nothing or simply defending 20th century solutions, let’s
imagine together what we could do to give every American a fighting chance in the 21st
century.
What if we prepared every child in America with the education and skills they need to compete
in the new economy? If we made sure that college was affordable for everyone who wanted
to go? If we walked up to those Maytag workers and we said “Your old job is not coming back,
but a new job will be there because we’re going to seriously retrain you and there’s life-long
education that’s waiting for you -- the sorts of opportunities that Knox has created with the
Strong Futures scholarship program.
What if no matter where you worked or how many times you switched jobs, you had health
care and a pension that stayed with you always, so you all had the flexibility to move to a
better job or start a new business? What if instead of cutting budgets for research and
development and science, we fueled the genius and the innovation that will lead to the new
jobs and new industries of the future?
Right now, all across America, there are amazing discoveries being made. If we supported
these discoveries on a national level, if we committed ourselves to investing in these
possibilities, just imagine what it could do for a town like Galesburg. Ten or twenty years
down the road, that old Maytag plant could re-open its doors as an Ethanol refinery that
turned corn into fuel. Down the street, a biotechnology research lab could open up on the
cusp of discovering a cure for cancer. And across the way, a new auto company could be busy
churning out electric cars. The new jobs created would be filled by American workers trained
with new skills and a world-class education.
All of that is possible but none of it will come easy. Every one of us is going to have to work
more, read more, train more, think more. We will have to slough off some bad habits -- like
driving gas guzzlers that weaken our economy and feed our enemies abroad. Our children will
have to turn off the TV set once in a while and put away the video games and start hitting the
books. We’ll have to reform institutions, like our public schools, that were designed for an
earlier time. Republicans will have to recognize our collective responsibilities, even as
Democrats recognize that we have to do more than just defend old programs.
It won’t be easy, but it can be done. It can be our future. We have the talent and the
resources and brainpower. But now we need the political will. We need a national
commitment.
And we need each of you.
Now, no one can force you to meet these challenges. If you want, it will be pretty easy for you
to leave here today and not give another thought to towns like Galesburg and the challenges
they face. There is no community service requirement in the real world; no one is forcing you
to care.
You can take your diploma, walk off this stage, and go chasing after the big house, and the
nice suits, and all the other things that our money culture says that you should want, that you
should aspire to, that you can buy.
But I hope you don’t walk away from the challenge. Focusing your life solely on making a buck
shows a certain poverty of ambition. It asks too little of yourself. You need to take up the
challenges that we face as a nation and make them your own. Not because you have a debt to
those who helped you get here, although you do have that debt. Not because you have an
obligation to those who are less fortunate than you, although I do think you do have that
obligation. It’s primarily because you have an obligation to yourself. Because individual
salvation has always depended on collective salvation. Because it’s only when you hitch your
wagon to something larger than yourself that you realize your true potential.
And I know that all of you are wondering how you’ll do this, the challenges seem so big. They
seem so difficult for one person to make a difference.
But we know it can be done. Because where you’re sitting, in this very place, in this town, it’s
happened before.
Nearly two centuries ago, before civil rights, before voting rights, before Abraham Lincoln,
before the Civil War, before all of that, America was stained by the sin of slavery. In the
sweltering heat of southern plantations, men and women who looked like me could not escape
the life of pain and servitude in which they were sold. And yet, year after year, as this moral
cancer ate away at the American ideals of liberty and equality, the nation was silent.
But its people didn’t stay silent for long.
One by one, abolitionists emerged to tell their fellow Americans that this would not be our
place in history -- that this was not the America that had captured the imagination of the
world.
This resistance that they met was fierce, and some paid with their lives. But they would not be
deterred, and they soon spread out across the country to fight for their cause. One man from
New York went west, all the way to the prairies of Illinois to start a colony.
And here in Galesburg, freedom found a home.
Here in Galesburg, the main depot for the Underground Railroad in Illinois, escaped slaves
could roam freely on the streets and take shelter in people’s homes. And when their masters
or the police would come for them, the people of this town would help them escape north,
some literally carrying them in their arms to freedom.
Think about the risks that involved. If they were caught abetting a fugitive, you could’ve been
jailed or lynched. It would have been simple for these townspeople to turn the other way; to
go live their lives in a private peace.
And yet, they didn’t do that. Why?
Because they knew that we were all Americans; that we were all brothers and sisters; the
same reason that a century later, young men and women your age would take Freedom Rides
down south, to work for the Civil Rights movement. The same reason that black women would
walk instead of ride a bus after a long day of doing somebody else’s laundry and cleaning
somebody else’s kitchen. Because they were marching for freedom.
Today, on this day of possibility, we stand in the shadow of a lanky, raw-boned man with little
formal education who once took the stage at Old Main and told the nation that if anyone did
not believe the American principles of freedom and equality, that those principles were
timeless and all-inclusive, they should go rip that page out of the Declaration of
Independence.
My hope for all of you is that as you leave here today, you decide to keep these principles
alive in your own life and in the life of this country. You will be tested. You won’t always
succeed. But know that you have it within your power to try. That generations who have come
before you faced these same fears and uncertainties in their own time. And that through our
collective labor, and through God’s providence, and our willingness to shoulder each other’s
burdens, America will continue on its precious journey towards that distant horizon, and a
better day.
Thank you so much class of 2005, and congratulations on your graduation. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. President.
You know, four years ago, following the most devastating attack in our history, this Body
passed the USA PATRIOT Act in order to give our Nation's law enforcement the tools they
needed to track down terrorists who plot and lurk within our own borders and all over the
world; terrorists who, right now, are looking to exploit weaknesses in our laws and our
security to carry out attacks that may be even deadlier than those that took place on
September 11th.
We all agree that we need legislation to make it harder for suspected terrorists to go
undetected in this country. And we all agree that we needed to make it harder for them to
organize and strategize and get flight licenses and sneak across our borders. Americans
everywhere wanted to do that.
But soon after the PATRIOT Act passed, a few years before I even arrived here in the Senate,
I began hearing concerns from people of every background and political leaning that this law,
the very purpose of which was to protect us, was also threatening to violate some of the
rights and freedoms that we hold most dear; that it didn't just provide law enforcement the
powers it needed to keep us safe but powers that it didn't need to invade our privacy without
cause or suspicion.
Now, in Washington, this issue has tended to degenerate into the typical either/or debate:
Either we protect our people from terror or we protect our most cherished principles. I would
suggest, Mr. President, that this is a false choice. It asks too little of us and it assumes too
little about America.
That's why, as it's come to time to reauthorize the USA PATRIOT Act, we've been working in a
bipartisan way to do both -- to show American people that we can track down terrorists
without trampling on our civil liberties, to show the American people that the Federal
Government will only issue warrants and execute searches because it needs to do so, not
because it can do so.
What we have been trying to achieve under the leadership of a bipartisan group of Senators is
some accountability in this process to get answers and see evidence where there is suspicion.
Several weeks ago, these efforts bore fruit. The Judiciary Committee and the U.S. -- U.S.
Senate managed to pass a piece of bipartisan legislation that, while I can't say is perfect, was
able to address some of the most serious problems in the existing law.
Unfortunately, that strong bipartisan legislation has been tossed aside in conference. Instead,
we've been forced to consider a piece of rushed legislation that fails to address the concerns
of Members of both parties as well as the American people.
This is legislation that puts our own Justice Department above the law. When national security
letters are issued, they allow Federal agents to conduct any search on any American, no
matter how extensive, how wide ranging, without ever going before a judge to prove that the
search is necessary. All that is needed is a signoff from a local FBI agent. That's it.
Once a business or a person receives notification that they will be searched, they are
prohibited from telling anyone about it and they're even prohibited from challenging this
automatic gag order in court. Even though judges have already found that similar restrictions
violate the first amendment, this conference report disregards the case law and the right to
challenge the gag order.
If you do decide to consult an attorney for legal advice, hold on. You will have to tell the FBI
that you've done so. Think about that: You want to talk to a lawyer about whether or not your
actions are going to be causing you to get into trouble, you've got to tell the FBI that you're
consulting a lawyer. This is unheard of. There is no such requirement in any other area of the
law. I see no reason why it's justified here.
And if someone wants to know why their own Government has decided to go on a fishing
expedition through every personal record or private document, through the library books that
you read, the phone calls that you've made, the e-mails that you've sent, this legislation gives
people no rights to appeal the need for such a search in a court of law.
No judge will hear your plea; no jury will hear your case. This is just plain wrong. And there
are Republican Senators as well as Democratic Senators that recognize that it's plain wrong.
Giving law enforcement the tools they need to investigate suspicious activities is one thing
and it's the right thing; but doing it without any real oversight seriously jeopardizes the rights
of all Americans and the ideals America stands for.
Now, supporters of this conference report have argued we should just hold our noses and
support this legislation because it's not going to get any better. That is not a good argument.
We can do better. We've got time to do better. It doesn't convince me that I should support
this report. I believe we owe it to the Nation, we owe it to those who fought for our civil
liberties, we owe it to the future and our children to make sure that we craft the kind of
legislation that would make us proud, not just legislation that we would settle for because
we're in a rush. We don't have to settle for a PATRIOT Act that sacrifices our liberties or our
safety. We can have one that secures both.
Now, there have been proposals on both sides of the aisle and in both Houses of Congress to
extend the PATRIOT Act for three months so that we can reach an agreement on this bill that
is well thought through. I support these efforts and will oppose cloture on what I consider to
be this unacceptable conference report.
Mr. President, I thank you. I yield the floor....
Thank you very much, Mr. President. Today, we mourn the passing of Coretta Scott King.
And when I think about Coretta Scott King, I think about the little girl who walked five miles 
to school on those rural Alabama roads and felt the heat of racism each day she passed the 
door of the Whites­only school, so much closer to home. It didn't matter, because she studied 
and succeeded and excelled beyond most of her classmates, Black and White. She earned a 
college degree, and an acceptance to a prestigious graduate school up North. 
And one day she met a young preacher from Atlanta, and she fell in love with him. And he 
told her his dreams ­­ and she believed in those dreams. And she decided that she would help 
to make them real ­­ not just as a wife or as a friend, but as a partner in freedom's cause. 
Over the next years, Coretta Scott King did that in so many ways we can't even imagine. She 
raised a family, she marched through the streets, she inspired through song, she led through
speech ­­ even dodged the countless attempts on her family's life. And when one of those 
attempts finally took her love from this world, she made the selfless decision to carry on.
With no time to even cry or mourn, to wallow in anger or vengeance, Coretta Scott King took 
to the streets just four days after the assassination and led 50,000 through the streets of 
Memphis in a march for the kind of justice that her husband had given his life for. She spent
the rest of here marching for that same justice ­­ leading the King Center for Nonviolent
Social Change in Atlanta, and spreading her family's message of hope to every corner of this 
world.
You know, I had the great honor of knowing Mrs. King, and the occasion to visit with her in
Atlanta last year. She was an extraordinarily gracious woman. We sat and chatted in her living 
room. She showed me an album of photographs of her and Dr. King and the children. And 
then she told me what her husband had said to her once, at a time when she was feeling 
burdened, understandably, by all the stress and strain that had been placed on the family as a 
consequence of his role in the Civil Rights Movement. 
She said her husband suggested that:
When you are willing to make sacrifices for a great cause, you will never be alone 
because you will have divine companionship and the support of good people.
That was her husband's advice to her ­­ that when you are willing to make sacrifices for a 
great cause, you will never be alone.
Coretta Scott King died in her sleep last night. She certainly was not alone. She was joined by 
the companionship and support of a loving family and a grateful Nation ­­ inspired by her 
cause, dedicated to her work, and mournful of her passing.
My thoughts, condolences today are with her children. 
And I ask that she and her husband now rest together in eternal peace.
As many of you know, over the last few months I've been thinking hard about my plans for 
2008. Running for the presidency is a profound decision ­­ a decision no one should make on
the basis of media hype or personal ambition alone ­­ and so before I committed myself and 
my family to this race, I wanted to be sure that this was right for us and, more importantly, 
right for the country. 
I certainly didn't expect to find myself in this position a year ago. But as I've spoken to many 
of you in my travels across the states these past months, as I've read your emails and read
your letters, I've been struck by how hungry we all are for a different kind of politics. So I've 
spent some time thinking about how I could best advance the cause of change and progress 
that we so desperately need.
The decisions that have been made in Washington these past six years, and the problems that 
have been ignored, have put our country in a precarious place. Our economy is changing 
rapidly, and that means profound changes for working people. Many of you have shared with
me your stories about skyrocketing health care bills, the pensions you've lost and your 
struggles to pay for college for your kids. Our continued dependence on oil has put our 
security and our very planet at risk. And we're still mired in a tragic and costly war that should 
have never been waged. 
But challenging as they are, it's not the magnitude of our problems that concerns me the 
most. It's the smallness of our politics. America's faced big problems before. But today, our 
leaders in Washington seem incapable of working together in a practical, common sense way.
Politics has become so bitter and partisan, so gummed up by money and influence, that we 
can't tackle the big problems that demand solutions. And that's what we have to change first.  We have to change our politics, and come together around our common interests and 
concerns as Americans. 
This won't happen by itself. A change in our politics can only come from you ­­ from people 
across our country who believe there's a better way and are willing to work for it. Years ago,  as a community organizer in Chicago, I learned that meaningful change always begins at the 
grassroots, and that engaged citizens working together can accomplish extraordinary things. 
So even in the midst of the enormous challenges we face today, I have great faith and hope 
about the future ­­ because I believe in you. 
And that's why I wanted to tell you first that I'll be filing papers today to create a presidential 
exploratory committee. For the next several weeks, I'm going to talk with people from around 
the country, listening and learning more about the challenges we face as a nation, the 
opportunities that lie before us, and the role that a presidential campaign might play in 
bringing our country together. And on February 10th, at the end of these discussions and in
my home state of Illinois, I'll share my plans with my friends, neighbors, and fellow
Americans. 
In the meantime, I want to thank all of you for your time, your suggestions, your 
encouragement, and your prayers. And I look forward to continuing our conversation in the 
weeks and months to come.
Hello Springfield! Look at all of you. Look at all of you. Goodness. Thank you so much. Thank 
you so much. Giving all praise and honor to God for bringing us here today. Thank you so
much. I am so grateful to see all of you. You guys are still cheering back there? 
Let me begin by saying thanks to all you who've traveled, from far and wide, to brave the cold 
today. I know it's a little chilly ­­ but I'm fired up.
You know, we all made this journey for a reason. It's humbling to see a crowd like this, but in
my heart I know you didn't just come here for me. You came here because you believe in
what this country can be. In the face of war, you believe there can be peace. In the face of 
despair, you believe there can be hope. In the face of a politics that shut you out, that's told 
you to settle, that's divided us for too long, you believe that we can be one people, reaching 
for what's possible, building that more perfect union. 
That's the journey we're on today. But let me tell you how I came to be here. As most of you
know, I'm not a native of this great state. I moved to Illinois over two decades ago. I was a 
young man then, just a year out of college. I knew no one in Chicago when I arrived, was 
without money or family connections. But a group of churches had offered me a job as a 
community organizer for the grand sum of 13,000 dollars a year. And I accepted the job, sight
unseen, motivated then by a single, simple, powerful idea: that I might play a small part in
building a better America.
My work took me to some of Chicago's poorest neighborhoods. I joined with pastors and lay­ 
people to deal with communities that had been ravaged by plant closings.
I saw that the problems people faced weren't simply local in nature, that the decisions to close 
a steel mill was made by distant executives, that the lack of textbooks and computers in a 
school could be traced to skewed priorities of politicians a thousand miles away, and that 
when a child turns to violence ­­ I came to realize that ­­ there's a hole in that boy's heart
that no government alone can fill. 
It was in these neighborhoods that I received the best education that I ever had, and where I
learned the meaning of my Christian faith. 
After three years of this work, I went to law school, because I wanted to understand how the 
law should work for those in need. I became a civil rights lawyer, and taught constitutional 
law, and after a time, I came to understand that our cherished rights of liberty and equality 
depend on the active participation of an awakened electorate. It was with these ideas in mind 
that I arrived in this capital city as a state Senator. 
It was here, in Springfield, where I saw all that is America converge ­­ farmers and teachers, 
businessmen and laborers, all of them with a story to tell, all of them seeking a seat at the 
table, all of them clamoring to be heard. I made lasting friendships here, friends that I see 
here in the audience today. It was here where we learned to disagree without being 
disagreeable; that it's possible to compromise so long as you know those principles that can
never be compromised; and that so long as we're willing to listen to each other, we can
assume the best in people instead of the worst. 
That's why we were able to reform a death penalty system that was broken; that's why we 
were able to give health insurance to children in need; that's why we made the tax system 
right here in Springfield more fair and just for working families; and that's why we passed 
ethics reform that the cynics said could never, ever be passed.
It was here, in Springfield, where North, South, East, and West come together that I was 
reminded of the essential decency of the American people ­­ where I came to believe that
through this decency, we can build a more hopeful America. And that is why, in the shadow of 
the Old State Capitol, where Lincoln once called on a house divided to stand together, where 
common hopes and common dreams still live, I stand before you today to announce my 
candidacy for President of the United States of America.
Look, I recognize that there is a certain presumptuousness in this, a certain audacity, to this 
announcement. I know that I haven't spent a lot of time learning the ways of Washington. But
I've been there long enough to know that the ways of Washington must change.
The genius of our Founders is that they designed a system of government that can be 
changed. And we should take heart, because we've changed this country before. In the face of 
tyranny, a band of patriots brought an empire to its knees. In the face of secession, we 
unified a nation and set the captives free. In the face of Depression, we put people back to
work and lifted millions out of poverty. We welcomed immigrants to our shores. We opened 
railroads to the west. We landed a man on the moon. And we heard a King's call to let "justice 
roll down like waters, and righteousness like a mighty stream."
We've done this before. Each and every time, a new generation has risen up and done what's 
needed to be done. Today we are called once more, and it is time for our generation to
answer that call. For that is our unyielding faith ­­ that in the face of impossible odds, people 
who love their country can change it. 
That's what Abraham Lincoln understood. He had his doubts. He had his defeats. He had his 
skeptics. He had his setbacks. But through his will and his words, he moved a nation and 
helped free a people. It's because of the millions who rallied to his cause that we're no longer 
divided, North and South, slave and free. It's because men and women of every race, from 
every walk of life, continued to march for freedom long after Lincoln was laid to rest, that 
today we have the chance to face the challenges of this millennium together, as one people ­­  as Americans. 
All of us know what those challenges are today: a war with no end, a dependence on oil that 
threatens our future, schools where too many children aren't learning, and families struggling 
paycheck to paycheck despite working as hard as they can. We know the challenges. We've 
heard them. We've talked about them for years. 
What's stopped us from meeting these challenges is not the absence of sound policies and 
sensible plans. What's stopped us is the failure of leadership, the smallness of our politics ­­  the ease with which we're distracted by the petty and trivial, our chronic avoidance of tough
decisions, our preference for scoring cheap political points instead of rolling up our sleeves 
and building a working consensus to tackle the big problems of America.
For the past six years we've been told that our mounting debts don't matter. We've been told 
that the anxiety Americans feel about rising health care costs and stagnant wages are an
illusion. We've been told that climate change is a hoax. We've been told that tough talk and 
an ill­conceived war can replace diplomacy, and strategy, and foresight. And when all else 
fails, when Katrina happens, or the death toll in Iraq mounts, we've been told that our crises 
are somebody else's fault. We're distracted from our real failures, and told to blame the other 
Party, or gay people, or immigrants. 
And as people have looked away in disillusionment and frustration, we know what's filled the 
void: the cynics, the lobbyists, the special interests ­­ who've turned our government into a 
game only they can afford to play. They write the checks and you get stuck with the bill. They 
get the access while you get to write a letter. They think they own this government, but we're 
here today to take it back. The time for that kind of politics is over. It is through. It's time to
turn the page ­­ right here, and right now. 
Look, we have made some progress already. I was proud to help lead the fight in Congress 
that led to the most sweeping ethics reforms since Watergate. But Washington has a long way 
to go, and it won't be easy. That's why we'll have to set priorities. We'll have to make hard
choices. And although government will play a crucial role in bringing about the changes that 
we need, more money and programs alone will not get us to where we need to go. Each of us, 
in our own lives, will have to accept responsibility ­­ for instilling an ethic of achievement in 
our children, for adapting to a more competitive economy, for strengthening our communities, 
and sharing some measure of sacrifice.
So let us begin. Let us begin this hard work together. Let us transform this nation. Let us be 
the generation that reshapes our economy to compete in the digital age. Let's set high
standards for our schools and give them the resources they need to succeed. Let's recruit a 
new army of teachers, and give them better pay and more support in exchange for more 
accountability. Let's make college more affordable, and let's invest in scientific research, and 
let's lay down broadband lines through the heart of inner cities and rural towns all across 
America. We can do that. 
And as our economy changes, let's be the generation that ensures our nation's workers are 
sharing in our prosperity. Let's protect the hard­earned benefits their companies have 
promised. Let's make it possible for hardworking Americans to save for retirement. Let's allow
our unions and their organizers to lift up this country's middle­class again. We can do that. 
Let's be the generation that ends poverty in America. Every single person willing to work 
should be able to get job training that leads to a job, and earn a living wage that can pay the 
bills, and afford child care so their kids can have a safe place to go when they work. We can
do this. 
And let's be the generation that finally, after all these years, tackles our health care crisis. We 
can control costs by focusing on prevention, by providing better treatment to the chronically 
ill, and using technology to cut the bureaucracy. Let's be the generation that says right here, 
right now: We will have universal health care in America by the end of the next President's 
first term. We can do that. 
Let's be the generation that finally frees America from the tyranny of oil. We can harness 
homegrown, alternative fuels like ethanol and spur the production of more fuel­efficient cars. 
We can set up a system for capping greenhouse gases. We can turn this crisis of global
warming into a moment of opportunity for innovation, and job creation, and an incentive for 
businesses that will serve as a model for the world. Let's be the generation that makes future 
generations proud of what we did here. 
Most of all, let's be the generation that never forgets what happened on that September day 
and confront the terrorists with everything we've got. Politics doesn't have to divide us on this 
anymore; we can work together to keep our country safe. I've worked with the Republican
Senator Dick Lugar to pass a law that will secure and destroy some of the world's deadliest
weapons. We can work together to track down terrorists with a stronger military. We can
tighten the net around their finances. We can improve our intelligence capabilities and finally 
get homeland security right. But let's also understand that ultimate victory against our 
enemies will only come by rebuilding our alliances and exporting those ideals that bring hope 
and opportunity to millions of people around the globe.
We can do those things.
But all of this cannot come to pass until we bring an end to this war in Iraq. Most of you know
that I opposed this war from the start. I thought it was a tragic mistake.
Today we grieve for the families who have lost loved ones, the hearts that have been broken,  and the young lives that could have been. America, it is time to start bringing our troops 
home. It's time to admit that no amount of American lives can resolve the political
disagreement that lies at the heart of someone else's civil war. That's why I have a plan that
will bring our combat troops home by March of 2008. Letting the Iraqis know that we will not
be there forever is our last, best hope to pressure the Sunni and Shia to come to the table 
and find peace.
And there's one other thing that it's not too late to get right about this war, and that is the 
homecoming of the men and women, our veterans, who have sacrificed the most. Let us 
honor their courage by providing the care they need and rebuilding the military they love. Let
us be the generation that begins that work. 
I know there are those who don't believe we can do all these things. I understand the 
skepticism. After all, every four years, candidates from both Parties make similar promises, 
and I expect this year will be no different. All of us running for President will travel around the 
country offering ten­point plans and making grand speeches; all of us will trumpet those 
qualities we believe make us uniquely qualified to lead this country. But too many times, after 
the election is over, and the confetti is swept away, all those promises fade from memory, and 
the lobbyists and special interests move in, and people turn away, disappointed as before, left
to struggle on their own. 
That's why this campaign can't only be about me. It must be about us. It must be about what
we can do together. This campaign must be the occasion, the vehicle, of your hopes, and your 
dreams. It will take your time, your energy, and your advice to push us forward when we're 
doing right, and let us know when we're not. This campaign has to be about reclaiming the 
meaning of citizenship, restoring our sense of common purpose, and realizing that few 
obstacles can withstand the power of millions of voices calling for change.
By ourselves, this change will not happen. Divided, we are bound to fail. But the life of a tall,  gangly, self­made Springfield lawyer tells us that a different future is possible.
He tells us that there is power in words. 
He tells us that there's power in conviction. 
That beneath all the differences of race and region, faith and station, we are one people.
He tells us that there's power in hope.
As Lincoln organized the forces arrayed against slavery, he was heard to say this: "Of strange,
discordant, and even hostile elements, we gathered from the four winds, and formed and 
fought to battle through."¹ 
That is our purpose here today. That is why I am in this race ­­ not just to hold an office, but
to gather with you to transform a nation. I want to win that next battle ­­ for justice and 
opportunity.
I want to win that next battle ­­ for better schools, and better jobs, and better health care for 
all. I want us to take up the unfinished business of perfecting our union, and building a better 
America.
And if you will join with me in this improbable quest, if you feel destiny calling, and see as I
see, the future of endless possibility stretching out before us; if you sense, as I sense, that 
the time is now to shake off our slumber, and slough off our fears, and make good on the 
debt we owe past and future generations, then I am ready to take up the cause, and march
with you, and work with you ­­ today. 
Together we can finish the work that needs to be done, and usher in a new birth of freedom 
on this Earth. 
Thank you very much everybody ­­ let's get to work! I love you. Thank you. 
Mr. President, I rise, first, to offer strong words of support for the statement that was just
offered by the distinguished Senator from Massachusetts. I, as well, rise today to speak in
support of the Iraq resolution that the Senate will consider tomorrow.
Mr. President, the news from Iraq is very bad. Last week, a suicide bomber stood outside a
bookstore and killed 20 people. Other attacks killed 118 Shia pilgrims. On Sunday, a car bomb
went off in central Baghdad, and more than 30 people died. And the road from the airport into
Baghdad is littered with smoldering debris, craters from improvised explosive devices, and the
memories of our sons and daughters.
Mr. President, the civil war in Iraq rages on. The insurgents have started to change their
tactics. They hide in buildings and along the streets and wait for our helicopters. They've shot
down at least eight U.S. helicopters in the last month. More of our soldiers are dying and
coming home with their bodies broken and their nerves shattered at a VA system completely
unprepared for what they need to rebuild their lives.
Mr. President, it is not enough for the President to tell us that victory in this war is simply a
matter of American resolve. The American people have been extraordinarily resolved. They've
seen their sons and daughters killed or wounded in the streets of Fallujah. They've spent
hundreds of billions of dollars on this effort -- money that they know could have been devoted
to strengthening our homeland security and our competitive standing as a Nation. The failure
has not been a failure of resolve. That's not what's led us into chaos. It's been a failure of
strategy; and it's time that the strategy change. There is no military solution, Mr. President, to
the civil war that rages on in Iraq; and it's time for us to redeploy so that a political solution
becomes possible.
The news from Iraq is very bad, and it's been that way for at least four years. We all wish the
-- that the land the President and the Vice President speak of exists. We wish that there was
an Iraq where the insurgency was in the last throes, where the people work with security,
where children play outside, where a vibrant new democracy lights up the nighttime sky. We
wish for those things, but there's no alternative reality to what we see and read about in the
news, to what we've experienced these long four years.
I repeat, Mr. President, there is no military solution to this war. At this point, no amount of
soldiers can solve the grievances at the heart of someone else's civil war. The Iraqi people --
Shia, Sunni, and Kurd -- must come to the table and reach a political settlement themselves.
If they want peace, they must do the hard work necessary to achieve it.
Our failed strategy in Iraq has strengthened Iran's strategic position, reduced U.S. credibility
and influence around the world, placed Israel and other nations friendly to the United States
in the region in greater peril. These are not the signs of a well-laid plan. It's time for a
profound change.
This is what we're trying to do here today. We're saying it is time to start making plans to
redeploy our troops so that they can focus on the wider struggle against terrorism, win the
war in Afghanistan, strengthen our position in the Middle East, and pressure the Iraqis to
reach a political settlement. Even if this effort falls short, we will continue to try to accomplish
what the American people asked for last November.
I'm glad to see, though, that this new effort is gaining consensus. And I want to commend
Senator Reid for his efforts. He took the time to listen -- so many of us from both Chambers
of Congress could help develop this plan.
The decision in particular to begin a phased redeployment, with the goal of redeploying all our
combat forces by March 31st, 2008, is the right step. It's a measure the Iraq Study Group
spoke of, an idea I borrowed from them, an idea that, in a bill I introduced, now has more
than 60 cosponsors from House and Senate and from both sides of the aisle. They've
supported this plan since I announced a similar plan in January
The decision allows some U.S. forces to remain in Iraq with a clear mission to protect U.S. and
coalition personnel, conduct counterterrorism operations, and to train and equip Iraqi forces;
and that is a smart decision. President al-Maliki spoke at a conference and warned that the
violence in Iraq could spread throughout the region if it goes unchecked. By maintaining a
strong presence in Iraq and the Middle East, as both my bill and the leadership bill does, we
can ensure that the chaos does not spread.
I should also add that the decision to begin this phased redeployment within 120 days is a
practical one. Our military options have been exhausted. It's time to seek a political solution
to this war, and with this decision we send a clear signal to the parties involved that they need
to arrive at an accommodation.
Mr. President, while I strongly believe that this war never should have been authorized, I
believe we must be as careful in ending the war as we were careless getting in. While I prefer
my approach, as reflected in my bill, I believe that this new resolution does begin to point
U.S. policy in Iraq and the region in the right direction. An end to the war, and achieving a
political solution to Iraq's civil war, will not happen unless we demand it.
Peace with stability doesn't just happen because we wish for it. It comes when we never give
in and never give up and never tire of working towards a life on Earth worthy of our human
dignity. The decisions that have been made have led us to this crossroads -- a moment of
great peril, Mr. President.
We have a choice. We can continue down the road that's weakened our credibility and
damaged our strategic interests in the region or we can turn toward the future. The road
won't be smooth, and I have to say, Mr. President, that there will be risks with any approach.
But this approach is our last best hope to end this war so we can begin to bring our troops
home and begin the hard work of securing our country and our world from the threats that we
face.
The President has said he will continue down the road towards more troops and more of the
same failed policies. The President sought and won authorization from Congress to wage this
war from the start. But he is now dismissing and ignoring the will of the American people, that
is tired of years of watching the human and financial tolls mount.
Mr. President, the news from Iraq is very bad, but it can change if we in this Chamber say
"enough." Let this day be the day that begins the painful and difficult work of moving from
this crossroad. Let this be the day that we begin pulling towards the future with a responsible
conclusion to this painful chapter in our Nation's history. Mr. President, let this be the day
when we finally send a message that is so clear and so emphatic that it cannot be ignored.
Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the floor.
Thank you very much, Mr. President.  Mr. President, on Thursdays Senator Durbin and I hold a constituent coffee so we can hear 
from the folks back home. A young man came a few months ago who was about 25, 26 years 
old. He had been back from Iraq for a year. The first six months of that year had been spent
in a coma. An explosion had shattered his face, blinded him in both eyes, has left him without
the use of one arm. 
He talked to us about how he was going through rehab. He introduced us to his family. He has 
a wife and two young daughters like I do, and his wife talked for a bit about the adjustments 
they were making at home since dad got hurt. And I found myself looking at not just him, but
his wife, who loves him so much. And I thought about how their lives were forever changed
because of the decision that was carried out four years ago. 
The sacrifices of war are immeasurable. I first made this point in the fall of 2002, at the end of 
the speech that I gave opposing the invasion of Iraq. I said then that I certainly do not oppose 
all wars. Rather, I oppose dumb wars, rash wars, wars that are based on passion as opposed 
to wars based on a sober assessment of our national security interests, because there's no
decision more profound than the one we make to send our brave men and women into harm’s 
way.
I’ve thought about these words from time to time since that speech, but never so much as the 
day I saw that young man and his wife, and understood the degree to which their lives had
been turn upside down. 
The sacrifices of war are immeasurable. Too many have returned from Iraq with that soldier’s 
story ­­ with broken bodies and shattered nerves and wounds that even the best care may not
heal. Too many of our best have come home shrouded in the flag they loved. Too many moms 
and dads and husbands and wives have answered that knock on the door that’s hardest for 
any loved one to hear. And the rest of us have seen too many promises of swift victories and 
dying insurgencies and budding democracy giving way to the reality of a brutal civil war that 
goes on and on and on to this day.
The sacrifices of war, Mr. President, are immeasurable. It was not impossible to see back then
that we might arrive at the place we’re at today. I said then that a war based not on reason
but on passion, not on principle but on politics would lead to a U.S. occupation of 
undetermined length, at undetermined cost, with undetermined consequences. I believed that 
an invasion of Iraq without a clear rationale or strong international support would only 
strengthen the recruitment arm of al­Qaeda and erode the good standing and moral authority 
that took our country generations to build. There were other experts and leaders and 
everyday Americans who believed this too. 
I wish I had been wrong. I wish we weren’t here talking about this at the beginning of the 
war’s fifth year ­­ because the consequences of this war have been profound. And the 
sacrifices have been immeasurable.
Mr. President, those who would have us continue this war in perpetuity like to say that this is 
a matter of resolve on behalf of the American people. But the American people have been
extraordinarily resolved. They've seen their sons and daughters killed and wounded on the 
streets of Fallujah. They've spent hundreds of billions of dollars on this effort ­­ money that
could have been devoted to strengthening our homeland and our competitive standing as a 
nation. 
It is not a failure of resolve that has led us into this chaos but a failed strategy ­­ a strategy 
that has only strengthened Iran’s strategic position, increased threats posed by terrorist
organizations, reduced U.S. credibility and influence around the world, and placed Israel and 
other nations [friendly] to the United States in the region in greater peril. Iraq has not been a 
failure of resolve; it has been a failure of strategy, and that strategy must change. It is time 
to bring a responsible end to U.S. involvement in this conflict is now. 
It's become apparent, Mr. President, that there's no military solution to this war. No amount
of U.S. soldiers ­­ not 10,000 more, not 20,000 more, not almost 30,000 more than we know
we are sending ­­ can solve the grievances that lay at the heart of someone else’s civil war.
Our troops cannot serve as their diplomats, and we can no longer referee their civil war. We 
must begin a phased withdrawal of our forces starting May 1st, with the goal of removing all
combat forces by March 30th, 2008.  We also must make sure that we’re not as careless getting out of this war as we were getting 
in, and that’s why this withdrawal should be gradual, and maintain some U.S. troops in the 
region to prevent a wider war in the region, while they can also work on going after Al Qaeda
and other terrorists. But this phased withdrawal, Mr. President, must begin soon. Letting the 
Iraqis know that we will not be there forever is our last, best hope to pressure the Iraqis to
take ownership of their country and bring an end to their conflict. It is time for our troops to
start coming home. 
History will not judge, Mr. President, the architects of this war kindly. But the books have yet
to be written on our effort to right the wrongs we see in Iraq. The story has yet to be told 
about how we turned from this moment, found our way out of the desert, and took to heart
the lessons of war that too many refused to heed back then; for it is of little use or comfort to
recall past advice and warnings if we do not allow them to guide us in the challenges that lie 
ahead. Mr. President, threats loom large in an age where terrorist networks thrive, and there 
will certainly be times when we have to call on our brave servicemen and women to risk their 
lives again. 
But before we make that most profound of all decisions, before we send our best off to battle,
we must remember what led us to this day and learn from the principles that follow.  We must remember that ideology is not a foreign policy. We must not embark on a war based 
on untested theories, political agendas, or wishful thinking that has little basis in fact or 
reality. We must focus our efforts on the threats we know exist, and we must evaluate those 
threats with sound intelligence that is never manipulated for political reasons. 
Mr. President, we must remember that the cost of going it alone is immense. It is a choice we 
sometimes have to make, but one that must be made rarely and always reluctantly. That's 
because America’s standing in the world is a precious resource not easily rebuilt. We value the 
cooperation and goodwill of other nations not because it makes us feel good, but because it
makes all the world safer; because the only way to battle 21st century threats that race 
across the borders ­­ threats like terror and disease and nuclear proliferation ­­ is to enlist the 
resources and support of all nations. To win our wider struggle, we must let people across this 
planet know that there is another, more hopeful alternative to the hateful ideologies the 
terrorists espouse and a renewed America will reflect and champion that vision.  Mr. President, we must remember that planning for peace is just as critical as planning for 
war. Iraq was not just a failure of conception but a failure of execution, and so when a conflict
does arise that requires our involvement, we must understand that country’s history, its 
politics, its ethnic and religious divisions before our troops ever set foot on its soil.
We must understand that setting up ballot boxes does not a democracy make ­­ that real
freedom and real stability come from doing the hard work of helping to build a strong police 
force, and a legitimate government, and ensuring that people have food, and water, and 
electricity, and basic services. And we must be honest about how much of that we can do
ourselves and how much must come from the people themselves. 
Finally, Mr. President, we must remember that when we send our servicemen and women to
war, we make sure we give them the training they need, and the equipment that will keep 
them safe, and a mission that they can accomplish. We must respect our commanders’ advice 
not just when its politically convenient, but even when it’s not what we want to hear. And 
when our troops come home, it is our most solemn responsibility to make sure they come 
home to the services, and the benefits, and the care they deserve.
As we stand at the beginning of the fifth year of this war, Mr. President, let us remember that
young man from Illinois, and his wife, and his daughters, and the thousands upon thousands 
of families who are living the very real consequences and immeasurable sacrifices that have 
come from our decision to invade Iraq. We are so blessed in this country to have so many 
men and women like this ­­ Americans willing to put on that uniform, and say the hard
goodbyes, and risk their lives in a far off land because they know that such consequences and 
sacrifices are sometimes necessary to defend our country and achieve a lasting peace.
That is why we have no greater responsibility than to ensure the decision to place them in
harm’s way is the right one. And that is why we must learn the lessons of Iraq. It is what we 
owe our soldiers. It is what we owe their families. And it is what we owe our country ­­ now,  and all the days and months to come. 
Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the floor.
Thank you, Iowa.
You know, they said this day would never come.
They said our sights were set too high.
They said this country was too divided, too disillusioned to ever come together around a
common purpose.
But on this January night, at this defining moment in history, you have done what the cynics
said we couldn't do. You have done what the state of New Hampshire can do in five days. You
have done what America can do in this new year, 2008.
In lines that stretched around schools and churches, in small towns and in big cities, you
came together as Democrats, Republicans, and independents, to stand up and say that we are
one nation. We are one people. And our time for change has come.
You said the time has come to move beyond the bitterness and pettiness and anger that's
consumed Washington; to end the political strategy that's been all about division, and instead
make it about addition; to build a coalition for change that stretches through red states and
blue states; because that's how we'll win in November, and that's how we'll finally meet the
challenges that we face as a nation.
We are choosing hope over fear. We're choosing unity over division, and sending a powerful
message that change is coming to America.
You said the time has come to tell the lobbyists who think their money and their influence
speak louder than our voices that they don't own this government -- we do. And we are here
to take it back.
The time has come for a President who will be honest about the choices and the challenges we
face, who will listen to you and learn from you, even when we disagree, who won't just tell
you what you want to hear, but what you need to know. And in New Hampshire, if you give
me the same chance that Iowa did tonight, I will be that President for America.
I'll be a President who finally makes health care affordable and available to every single
American, the same way I expanded health care in Illinois, by bringing Democrats and
Republicans together to get the job done.
I'll be a President who ends the tax breaks for companies that ship our jobs overseas and put
a middle-class tax cut into the pockets of working Americans who deserve it.
I'll be a President who harnesses the ingenuity of farmers and scientists and entrepreneurs to
free this nation from the tyranny of oil once and for all.
And I'll be a President who ends this war in Iraq and finally brings our troops home, who
restores our moral standing, who understands that 9/11 is not a way to scare up votes but a
challenge that should unite America and the world against the common threats of the 21st
century -- common threats of terrorism and nuclear weapons, climate change and poverty,
genocide and disease.
Tonight, we are one step closer to that vision of America because of what you did here in
Iowa. And so I'd especially like to thank the organizers and the precinct captains, the
volunteers and the staff who made this all possible.
And while I'm at it on thank you's, I think it makes sense for me to thank the love of my life,
the rock of the Obama family, the closer on the campaign trail: Give it up for Michelle Obama.
I know you didn't do this for me. You did this because you believed so deeply in the most
American of ideas -- that in the face of impossible odds, people who love this country can
change it.
I know this. I know this because while I may be standing here tonight, I'll never forget that
my journey began on the streets of Chicago doing what so many of you have done for this
campaign and all the campaigns here in Iowa: organizing and working and fighting to make
people's lives just a little bit better.
I know how hard it is. It comes with little sleep, little pay, and a lot of sacrifice. There are
days of disappointment. But sometimes, just sometimes, there are nights like this: a night
that, years from now, when we've made the changes we believe in, when more families can
afford to see a doctor, when our children -- when Malia and Sasha and your children inherit a
planet that's a little cleaner and safer, when the world sees America differently, and America
sees itself as a nation less divided and more united, you'll be able to look back with pride and
say that this was the moment when it all began.
This was the moment when the improbable beat what Washington always said was inevitable.
This was the moment when we tore down barriers that have divided us for too long; when we
rallied people of all parties and ages to a common cause; when we finally gave Americans who
had never participated in politics a reason to stand up and to do so.
This was the moment when we finally beat back the politics of fear and doubt and cynicism,
the politics where we tear each other down instead of lifting this country up. This was the
moment.
Years from now, you'll look back and you'll say that this was the moment, this was the place
where America remembered what it means to hope. For many months, we've been teased,
even derided for talking about hope. But we always knew that hope is not blind optimism. It's
not ignoring the enormity of the tasks ahead or the roadblocks that stand in our path.
It's not sitting on the sidelines or shirking from a fight. Hope is that thing inside us that
insists, despite all the evidence to the contrary, that something better awaits us if we have
the courage to reach for it and to work for it and to fight for it.
Hope is what I saw in the eyes of the young woman in Cedar Rapids who works the night shift
after a full day of college and still can't afford health care for a sister who's ill -- a young
woman who still believes that this country will give her the chance to live out her dreams.
Hope is what I heard in the voice of the New Hampshire woman who told me that she hasn't
been able to breathe since her nephew left for Iraq -- who still goes to bed each night praying
for his safe return.
Hope is what led a band of colonists to rise up against an empire, what led the greatest of
generations to free a continent and heal a nation, what led young women and young men to
sit at lunch counters and brave fire hoses and march through Selma and Montgomery for
freedom's cause.
Hope is what led me here today. With a father from Kenya, a mother from Kansas, and a
story that could only happen in the United States of America.
Hope is the bedrock of this nation -- the belief that our destiny will not be written for us, but
by us, by all those men and women who are not content to settle for the world as it is, who
have the courage to remake the world as it should be.
That is what we started here in Iowa and that is the message we can now carry to New
Hampshire and beyond; the same message we had when we were up and when we were
down; the one that can save this country, brick by brick, block by block, calloused hand by
calloused hand; that together, ordinary people can do extraordinary things.
Because we are not a collection of red states and blue states. We are the United States of
America. And in this moment, in this election, we are ready to believe again.
Thank you, Iowa.
Scripture tells us that when Joshua and the Israelites arrived at the gates of Jericho, they 
could not enter. The walls of the city were too steep for any one person to climb. They were 
too strong to be taken down by brute force. And so, the people sat for days, unable to pass on
through; but God had a plan for His People. He told them to stand together and march
together around the city, and on the seventh day he told them that when they heard the 
sound of the ram’s horn, they should speak with one voice. And, at the chosen hour when the 
horn sounded and a chorus of voices cried out together, the mighty walls of Jericho came 
tumbling down. That’s what scripture tells us. 
And there are many lessons to take from this passage, just as there are many lessons to take 
from this day, just as there are many memories that fill the space of this church. As I was 
thinking about which ones we needed to remember at this hour, my mind went back to the 
very beginning of the modern Civil Rights era. Because before Memphis and the mountaintop,
before the bridge in Selma and the march on Washington, before Birmingham and the 
beatings, the fire hoses, and the loss of those four little girls, before there was King the icon
and his magnificent dream, there was King the young preacher and a people who found 
themselves suffering under the yolk of oppression. And on the eve of the bus boycotts in
Montgomery, at a time when many were still doubtful about the possibilities of change, a time 
when there were those in the black community who not only mistrusted each other, but
mistrusted themselves ­­ King inspired with words not of anger, but of an urgency, a fierce 
urgency that still speaks to us today. “Unity,” he said, “is the great need of the hour.” “Unity 
is the great need of the hour.” Unity is how we shall overcome.
What Dr. King understood is that if just one person chose to walk instead of ride the bus, 
those walls of oppression would not be moved. But maybe if a few more decided to walk, 
those foundations might start to shake. If just a few women were willing to do what Rosa 
Parks had been willing to do, maybe the cracks in those walls would start to show. If 
teenagers took rides from North to South, maybe a few bricks would come loose. Maybe if 
white folks marched because they’d come to understand that their freedom was wrapped up in
the freedom of others, that they too had a stake in the impending battle, the walls would 
begin to sway, and if enough Americans were awakened to injustice, if they joined together 
North and South, rich and poor, Jew and Gentile, then perhaps that wall would come tumbling 
down, and justice would flow like waters of righteousness, like a mighty stream. “Unity is the 
great need of the hour.” That’s what Dr. King said. It is the great need of this hour as well,  not because it sounds pleasant, not because it makes us feel good, but because it's the only 
way we can overcome the essential deficit that exits in this country. 
I’m not talking about the budget deficit. I’m not talking about the trade deficit. Talking about
the moral deficit in this country. I’m talking about an empathy deficit, the inability to
recognize ourselves in one another, to understand that we are our brother’s keeper and our 
sister’s keeper, that in the words of Dr. King, “We are all tied together in a single garment of 
destiny.” We have an empathy deficit when we’re still sending our children down corridors of 
shame, schools in the forgotten corners of America where the color of your skin still affects 
the content of your education. We have a deficit when CEOs are making more in ten minutes 
than ordinary workers are making in an entire year, when families lose their homes so
unscrupulous lenders can make a profit, when mothers can’t afford a doctor when their 
children are stricken with illness. We have a deficit in this country when we have Scooter 
Libby justice for some and Jena justice for others, when our children see hanging nooses from 
a school yard tree today, in the present, in the 21st century. We have a deficit when homeless 
veterans sleep on the streets of our cities, when innocents are slaughtered in the deserts of 
Darfur, when young Americans serve tour after tour after tour after tour of duty in a war that 
should have never been authorized and should have never been waged. We have an empathy 
deficit in this country that has to be closed. We have a deficit when it takes a breach in the 
levees to reveal the breach in our compassion, when it takes a terrible storm to reveal the 
hungry that God calls on us to feed, the sick that He calls on us to care for, the least of these 
that He commands that we treat as our own. So, we have a deficit to close. We have walls, 
barriers to justice and equality that must come down, and to do this, we know that “unity is 
the great need of the hour.”
However, all too often, when we talk about unity in this country, we’ve come to believe that it
can be purchased on the cheap. We’ve come to believe that racial reconciliation can come 
easily; that it’s just a matter of a few ignorant people trapped in the prejudices of the past,  and that if the demagogues and those who would exploit our racial divisions will simply go
away then all our problems will be solved. All too often, we seek to ignore the profound 
structural and institutional barriers that stand in the way of insuring opportunity for all of our 
children, or decent jobs for all of our people, or health care for those who are sick. We offer 
unity, but we are not willing to pay the price that's required
Of course, true unity cannot be so easily purchased. It starts with a change in attitudes. It
starts with changing our hearts, and changing our minds, broadening our spirit. It’s not easy 
to stand in somebody else’s shoes. It’s not easy to see past our own differences. We’ve all
encountered this in our own lives. What makes it even more difficult is that we have a politics 
in this country that seeks to drive us apart, that puts up walls between us. We are told that 
those who differ from us on a few things, differ from us on all things, that our problems are 
the fault of those who don’t think like us or look like us or come from where we do. The 
Welfare Queen, she’s taking our money. The Immigrant, he’s taking our jobs. The believer 
condemns the nonbeliever as immoral, and the nonbeliever chides the believer for being 
intolerant. 
And for most of this country’s history, we in the African­American community have been at
the receiving end of man’s inhumanity to man. All of us understand intimately the insidious 
role that race still sometimes plays on the job and in the schools, in our health care system, 
and in our criminal justice system. 
And yet, if we are honest with ourselves, we must admit that none of our hands are entirely 
clean. If we’re honest with ourselves, we'll acknowledge that our own community has not
always been true to King’s vision of a beloved community. If we’re honest with ourselves, we 
have to admit that there have been times when we've scorned our gay brothers and sisters 
instead of embracing them. The scourge of anti­Semitism has at times revealed itself in our 
community. For too long, some of us have seen immigrants only as competitors for jobs 
instead of companions in the fight for opportunity. Everyday our politics fuels and exploits this 
kind of division across all races and regions, across gender and party. It is played out on 
television; it is sensationalized by the media. Last week, it crept into the campaign for 
President with charges and countercharges that serve to obscure the issues instead of 
illuminating the critical choices we face as a nation. None of our hands are clean. 
So let us say that on this day of all days, each of us carries with us the task of changing our 
hearts and minds. The divisions, the stereotypes, the scapegoating, the ease with which we 
blame the plight of ourselves on others ­­ all of that distracts us from the common challenges 
that we face, war and poverty, inequality and injustice. We can no longer afford to build 
ourselves up by tearing each other down. We can no longer afford to traffic in lies or fear or 
hate. It's the poison that we must purge from our politics, the wall that we must tear down
before the hour grows too late. Because if Dr. King could love his jailer, if he could call on the 
faithful, who once sat where you do, to forgive those who had set dogs and fire hoses upon
them, then surely we can look past what divides us in our time and bind up our wounds and 
erase the sympathy deficit that exists in our hearts. 
But if changing our hearts and our minds is the first critical step, we cannot stop there. It’s 
not enough to bemoan the plight of the poor in this country and remain unwilling to push our 
elected officials to provide the resources to fix our schools. It's not enough to decry the 
disparities of health care and yet allow the insurance companies and the drug companies to
block real reform in our health care system.
It’s not enough for us to abhor the costs of a misguided war, and yet we continue to allow
ourselves to be driven by a politics of fear that sees the threat of an attack as a way to scare 
up votes instead of a call to come together in a common effort. 
Scripture tells us that we are judged not just by word but by deed. And if we are truly to bring 
about the unity that is needed, that is so crucial in this time, we have to find it within
ourselves to act on what we know, to understand that living up to this country’s ideals and its 
possibilities is going to require great effort and great resources, sacrifice and stamina. We 
can’t pass a law called No Child Left Behind and then leave the money behind. That is not a 
serious effort in bringing about the unity that is needed. We can’t celebrate Dr. King’s dream,
and yet still have insufficient funds to cash that promissory note that was promised at the 
beginning of this nation. That is what is at stake in this great debate we are having today. 
Changes that are needed are not just a matter of tinkering around the edges. They will not
come if politicians simply tell us what we want to hear. All of us will be called upon to make 
some sacrifice. None of us will be exempt from responsibility. We've had to fight to fix our 
schools, but we also have to challenge ourselves to be better parents, and turn off the 
television set, and put away the video game, and our men have to be home with our children.  That, too, is part of the challenge that we must make. 
We will have to confront the biases in our criminal justice system, but we also have to
acknowledge the deep­seeded violence that still resides in our own communities, in too many 
of the hearts of our young people, and we have to break the grip of that violence wherever we 
see it. That’s how we’re going to bring about the change that we seek. That’s how Dr. King led 
this country through the wilderness. He did it with words, words that he spoke not just to the 
children of slaves but the children of slave owners, words that inspired not just black but also
white, not just Christian but also Jew and Muslim and Buddhists and Atheists, not just the 
southerner but also the northerner. He led with words, but he also led with deeds. He also led 
by example. He led by marching and going to jail and suffering threats and beatings and being 
away from his family. He led by taking a stand against a war knowing full well that it would 
diminish his popularity. He led by challenging our economic structures, understanding that it
would cause discomfort. Dr. King understood that unity cannot be won on the cheap, that we 
would have to earn it through great effort and determination. That’s the unity, the hard
earned unity that we need right now. That is the effort, the determination that can transform 
blind optimism into hope.
You know people have remarked on the fact that I talk about hope a lot in my campaign. You
know they tease me a little bit. Some have been scornful. They say, “Ah, he’s talking about
hope again. He’s so idealistic. He’s so naïve. He’s a hope monger.” That’s okay. It’s true. I talk
about hope. I talk about it a lot because the odds of me standing here today are so small, so
remote that I couldn’t of gotten here without some hope. You know, my daddy left me when I
was two years old. I needed some hope to get here. I was raised by a single mother. I needed 
some hope to get here. I got in trouble when I was a teenager, did some things folks now like 
to talk about. I needed some hope to get here. I wasn’t born into money, or great wealth, or 
great privilege, or status. I was given love, an education, and some hope. That’s what I got.  That’s my birthright.
So I talk about hope. I put “Hope” on my campaign signs. It doesn’t even have my name on 
them sometimes ­­ just says “Hope.” Folks don’t know who they’re voting for, but it makes 
them feel good. Say, you know, huh? I spoke about hope at the Democratic Convention. I
wrote a book called The Audacity of Hope. And so I’m puzzled when some people, some of the 
other candidates make a mockery of the idea. They say I’m pedaling false hopes. "Get a 
reality check," they tell me. And I have to try to understand what they're saying. The 
implication is that if you are hopeful, that you somehow must be engaging in wishful thinking.
Your head must be in the clouds; that you must be passive and just sit back and wait for 
things to happen to you. That seems to be the implication. 
And so I have to explain to people that’s not what hope is. Hope is not blind optimism. Hope is 
not ignorance of the barriers and hurdles and hazards that stand in your way. Hope’s just the 
opposite. I know how hard it will be to provide health care to every single American. The 
insurance companies, drug companies, they don’t want to give up their profits. I know it won’t
be easy to have a energy policy that makes sense for America because the oil companies like 
writing the energy bills. I know that alleviating poverty, or making sure all our children can
learn, or eliminating the scourge of racism in our society ­­ none of those things lend 
themselves to simple solutions. 
I know because I fought on the streets as a community organizer in poor neighborhoods on
the Southside of Chicago alongside those without jobs or without prospects for the future. I
have fought in the courts as a civil rights attorney for those who had been denied opportunity 
on the job or denied access to the ballot box. I’ve seen good legislation die because good 
intentions weren’t enough, because they weren’t fortified with a political majority and political
will. I’ve seen this country’s judgment clouded by fear. I know how easily a country can be 
misled when it is afraid. I know how hard it is. Everybody here understands how difficult it is 
to bring about true change, change that we can believe in. But I also know this: nothing in
this country worthwhile has ever happened except somebody somewhere decided to hope.
That’s how this country was founded because a group of patriots decided they were going to
take on the British Empire. Nobody was putting their money on them. That’s how slaves and 
abolitionists resisted that evil system. That’s how a new President was able to chart a course 
to insure that this nation would no longer remain half slave and half free. That’s how the 
greatest generation defeated Fascism and overcame a Great Depression. That’s how women
won the right to vote. That’s how workers won the right to organize. That’s how young people 
and old people and middle­aged folks were willing to walk instead of ride the bus, and folks 
came down on Freedom Rides. They marched, and they sat in, and they were beaten and fire 
houses were sent on them, and dogs were sent on them, and some went to jail, and some 
died for freedom's cause. That’s what hope is. Imagining and then fighting for and struggling 
for and sometimes dying for what didn’t seem possible before. There’s nothing naïve about
that. There are no false hopes in that. 
I don’t believe in false hopes. Imagine if John F. Kennedy had looked up at the moon and 
said, "Well, that’s too far." False hopes, we can’t go there.
If Dr. King had stood on the Lincoln Memorial and said, "Y’all go home; we can’t overcome."
There’s no such thing as false hopes, but what I know deep in my heart is that we cannot
bring about change unless we are unified, unless we do it together. Change does not happen
from the top down ­­ in America or anywhere else. It happens from the bottom up. It happens 
because ordinary people dream extraordinary things. It’s because all of you decide that
change must come. That I know. 
It wasn't just one voice that shouted out before the walls of Jericho. All the voices came 
together, a chorus of voices. That’s what gives me hope: not just those who ascend to high
office, but the changes that are happening in ordinary places. The stories that give me my 
hope don’t happen in the spotlight. When I think about Dr. King, I suspect he was sustained 
not by having dinner with Presidents; not by getting the Nobel Peace Prize; but coming back 
to church and seeing the mothers of the church and the deacons. Those who maintained their 
dignity were standing up straight in the face of injustice. That’s where he drew his hope. He 
saw God in their faces. Those stories don’t happen on a presidential stage; they happen in the 
quiet quarters of our lives. They happen in the moments we least expect. So, let me close by 
giving an example of one of those stories. 
There is a young woman, 23 years old, white woman, named Ashley Baia, who
organizes for our campaign in Florence, South Carolina. Ashley has been working to organize 
mostly black folks. She’s in Florence, South Carolina. She’s been doing it since the beginning 
of the campaign, and the other day she...set up a round table discussion where everyone 
around was telling their story about who they were and why they were there. And so, Ashley 
explained, she started things off, by explaining why she was there. And she explained that
when she was nine years old her mother got cancer, and because she had to miss a day of 
work she was let go; and she lost her health care; and then she had to file for bankruptcy. 
They were on hard times, and that’s when Ashley, nine­years­old at the time, decided she had
to do something to help her mom, and she knew that food was one of their most expensive 
costs. They didn’t have a lot of money. Ashley lived in a poor household.
And so Ashley convinced her mother that she really liked and really wanted to eat more than 
anything else mustard and relish sandwiches. She had heard that condiments like mustard
and relish were cheap. And she concocted in her own mind at the age of nine that she would 
convince her mother that that’s the only thing she wanted to eat everyday, because she 
figured that would be a way of saving money for the family and helping them alleviate their 
hardships. So she did this for a year until her mom got better. And in that round table she told 
everyone that the reason she joined our campaign was so that she could help millions of other 
children in the country who want and need to help their parents too. She had heard me speak 
about my mother having cancer and having to worry about maybe not getting the health care 
she needed because of a preexisting condition, and she had connected with that. She thought,  maybe Barack would fight for my mother. And if he would fight for my mother, then maybe I
will fight alongside him. That’s what had brought her to Florence.
So Ashley finishes her story and then goes around the room and asks everyone else why 
they’re supporting the campaign. They all have different stories and different reasons: some 
bring up specific issues; some talk about, upset about, affirmative action; some talk about,  you know, "I want to see more jobs in the community"; some are frustrated about trade; 
some just like me.
So they all got a bunch of different reasons, and finally, at the end of this discussion, they 
come to this elderly black man. He’s been sitting there quiet the whole time, hasn’t been
saying a word. And Ashley asks him why is he there. And he doesn’t bring up a specific issue.
He does not say healthcare or the economy. He doesn’t talk about the Iraq War. He doesn’t 
say anything about education. He doesn’t say that he’s there because he likes Barack Obama,
or he’s proud of the possibility of the first African American President. He simply says to
everyone in the room, “I am here because of Ashley. I am here because of this young girl,  and the fact that she's willing to fight for what she believes in. And that reminds me that I still
have some fight left in me, and I’m going stand up for what I believe in.”
Now, by itself, that single moment of recognition between that young white girl and that old 
black man, that’s not enough to change a country. By itself, it’s not enough to give health
care to the sick or jobs to the jobless or education to our children, but it is where we begin.  It’s why I believe that the walls in that room began to shake at that moment. And if they can
shake in that room, then they can shake here in Atlanta, and if they can shake in Atlanta,
then they can shake in the state of Georgia, and if they can shake in Georgia, they can shake 
all across America. And if enough of our voices join together, if we see each other in each
other’s eyes, we can bring those walls tumbling down. The walls of Jericho can finally come 
tumbling down. 
That is our hope, but only if we pray together, if we work together, and if we march together. 
Ebenezer, we cannot walk alone. Brothers and sisters, we cannot walk alone. In the struggle 
for justice and for equality, we cannot walk alone. In the struggle for opportunity and justice, 
we cannot walk alone. In the struggle to heal this nation and repair the world, we cannot walk 
alone. So I ask you to walk with me and march with me and join your voices with mine, and 
together we will sing the song that tears down the walls that divide us and lift up an America 
that is truly indivisible with liberty and justice for all.  May God bless the memory of the great pastor of this church. 
And may God bless the United States of America. 
Thank you. Thank you.
Let me begin by thanking Harris Wofford for his contributions to this country. In so many
different ways, he exemplifies what we mean by the word "citizen." And so we are very
grateful to him for all the work he has done; and I'm thankful for the gracious and thoughtful
introduction.
"We the people, in order to form a more perfect union." Two hundred and twenty one years
ago, in a hall that still stands across the street, a group of men gathered and, with these
simple words, launched America's improbable experiment in democracy. Farmers and
scholars, statesmen and patriots who had traveled across the ocean to escape tyranny and
persecution finally made real their Declaration of Independence at a Philadelphia convention
that lasted through the spring of 1787.
The document they produced was eventually signed, but ultimately unfinished. It was stained
by this nation's original sin of slavery, a question that divided the colonies and brought the
convention to a stalemate until the founders chose to allow the slave trade to continue for at
least 20 more years, and to leave any final resolution to future generations. Of course, the
answer to the slavery question was already embedded within our Constitution -- a
Constitution that had at is very core the ideal of equal citizenship under the law; a
Constitution that promised its people liberty and justice, and a union that could be and should
be perfected over time.
And yet words on a parchment would not be enough to deliver slaves from bondage, or
provide men and women of every color and creed their full rights and obligations as citizens of
the United States. What would be needed were Americans in successive generations who were
willing to do their part -- through protests and struggles, on the streets and in the courts,
through a civil war and civil disobedience, and always at great risk -- to narrow that gap
between the promise of our ideals and the reality of their time.
This was one of the tasks we set forth at the beginning of this presidential campaign: to
continue the long march of those who came before us, a march for a more just, more equal,
more free, more caring, and more prosperous America. I chose to run for President at this
moment in history because I believe deeply that we cannot solve the challenges of our time
unless we solve them together, unless we perfect our union by understanding that we may
have different stories, but we hold common hopes; that we may not look the same and may
not have come from the same place, but we all want to move in the same direction: towards a
better future for our children and our grandchildren. And this belief comes from my unyielding
faith in the decency and generosity of the American people. But it also comes from my own
story.
I'm the son of a black man from Kenya and a white woman from Kansas. I was raised with the
help of a white grandfather who survived a Depression to serve in Patton's army during World
War II, and a white grandmother who worked on a bomber assembly line at Fort Leavenworth
while he was overseas. I've gone to some of the best schools in America and I've lived in one
of the world's poorest nations. I am married to a black American who carries within her the
blood of slaves and slave owners, an inheritance we pass on to our two precious daughters. I
have brothers, sisters, nieces, nephews, uncles, and cousins of every race and every hue
scattered across three continents. And for as long as I live, I will never forget that in no other
country on earth is my story even possible. It's a story that hasn't made me the most
conventional of candidates. But it is a story that has seared into my genetic makeup the idea
that this nation is more than the sum of its parts -- that out of many, we are truly one.
Now throughout the first year of this campaign, against all predictions to the contrary, we saw
how hungry the American people were for this message of unity. Despite the temptation to
view my candidacy through a purely racial lens, we won commanding victories in states with
some of the whitest populations in the country. In South Carolina, where the Confederate flag
still flies, we built a powerful coalition of African Americans and white Americans. This is not to
say that race has not been an issue in this campaign. At various stages in the campaign, some
commentators have deemed me either "too black" or "not black enough." We saw racial
tensions bubble to the surface during the week before the South Carolina primary. The press
has scoured every single exit poll for the latest evidence of racial polarization, not just in
terms of white and black, but black and brown as well.
And yet, it's only been in the last couple of weeks that the discussion of race in this campaign
has taken a particularly divisive turn. On one end of the spectrum, we've heard the implication
that my candidacy is somehow an exercise in affirmative action; that it's based solely on the
desire of wild and wide-eyed liberals to purchase racial reconciliation on the cheap. On the
other end, we've heard my former pastor, Jeremiah Wright, use incendiary language to
express views that have the potential not only to widen the racial divide, but views that
denigrate both the greatness and the goodness of our nation and that rightly offend white and
black alike.
Now I've already condemned, in unequivocal terms, the statements of Reverend Wright that
have caused such controversy, and in some cases, pain. For some, nagging questions remain:
Did I know him to be an occasionally fierce critic of American domestic and foreign policy? Of
course. Did I ever hear him make remarks that could be considered controversial while I sat in
the church? Yes. Did I strongly disagree with many of his political views? Absolutely, just as
I'm sure many of you have heard remarks from your pastors, priests, or rabbis with which you
strongly disagree.
But the remarks that have caused this recent firestorm weren't simply controversial. They
weren't simply a religious leader's efforts to speak out against perceived injustice. Instead,
they expressed a profoundly distorted view of this country, a view that sees white racism as
endemic and that elevates what is wrong with America above all that we know is right with
America; a view that sees the conflicts in the Middle East as rooted primarily in the actions of
stalwart allies like Israel instead of emanating from the perverse and hateful ideologies of
radical Islam.
As such, Reverend Wright's comments were not only wrong but divisive, divisive at a time
when we need unity; racially charged at a time when we need to come together to solve a set
of monumental problems: two wars, a terrorist threat, a falling economy, a chronic health
care crisis, and potentially devastating climate change -- problems that are neither black or
white or Latino or Asian, but rather problems that confront us all.
Given my background, my politics, and my professed values and ideals, there will no doubt be
those for whom my statements of condemnation are not enough. Why associate myself with
Reverend Wright in the first place, they may ask? Why not join another church? And I confess
that if all that I knew of Reverend Wright were the snippets of those sermons that have run in
an endless loop on the television sets and YouTube, if Trinity United Church of Christ
conformed to the caricatures being peddled by some commentators, there is no doubt that I
would react in much the same way.
But the truth is, that isn't all that I know of the man. The man I met more than twenty years
ago is a man who helped introduce me to my Christian faith, a man who spoke to me about
our obligations to love one another, to care for the sick and lift up the poor.
He is a man who served his country as a United States Marine, and who has studied and
lectured at some of the finest universities and seminaries in the country, and who over 30
years has led a church that serves the community by doing God's work here on Earth -- by
housing the homeless, ministering to the needy, providing day care services and scholarships
and prison ministries, and reaching out to those suffering from HIV/AIDS.
In my first book, Dreams From My Father, I described the experience of my first service at
Trinity, and it goes as follows:
People began to shout, to rise from their seats and clap and cry out, a forceful wind
carrying the reverend's voice up to the rafters.
And in that single note -- hope -- I heard something else; at the foot of that cross,
inside the thousands of churches across the city, I imagined the stories of ordinary
black people merging with the stories of David and Goliath, Moses and Pharaoh, the
Christians in the lion's den, Ezekiel's field of dry bones.
Those stories of survival and freedom and hope became our stories, my story. The
blood that spilled was our blood; the tears our tears; until this black church, on this
bright day, seemed once more a vessel carrying the story of a people into future
generations and into a larger world. Our trials and triumphs became at once unique
and universal, black and more than black. In chronicling our journey, the stories and
songs gave us a meaning to reclaim memories that we didn't need to feel shame about
-- memories that all people might study and cherish and with which we could start to
rebuild.
That has been my experience at Trinity. Like other predominantly black churches across the
country, Trinity embodies the black community in its entirety -- the doctor and the welfare
mom, the model student and the former gang-banger. Like other black churches, Trinity's
services are full of raucous laughter and sometimes bawdy humor. They are full of dancing
and clapping and screaming and shouting that may seem jarring to the untrained ear. The
church contains in full the kindness and cruelty, the fierce intelligence and the shocking
ignorance, the struggles and successes, the love and, yes, the bitterness and biases that
make up the black experience in America.
And this helps explain, perhaps, my relationship with Reverend Wright. As imperfect as he
may be, he has been like family to me. He strengthens my faith, officiated my wedding, and
baptized my children. Not once in my conversations with him have I heard him talk about any
ethnic group in derogatory terms or treat whites with whom he interacted with anything but
courtesy and respect. He contains within him the contradictions -- the good and the bad -- of
the community that he has served diligently for so many years.
I can no more disown him than I can disown the black community. I can no more disown him
than I can disown my white grandmother, a woman who helped raise me, a woman who
sacrificed again and again for me, a woman who loves me as much as she loves anything in
this world, but a woman who once confessed her fear of black men who passed her by on the
street, and who on more than one occasion has uttered racial or ethnic stereotypes that made
me cringe.
These people are part of me. And they are part of America, this country that I love.
Now, some will see this as an attempt to justify or excuse comments that are simply
inexcusable. I can assure you it is not. And I suppose the politically safe thing to do would be
to move on from this episode and just hope that it fades into the woodwork. We can dismiss
Reverend Wright as a crank or a demagogue, just as some have dismissed Geraldine Ferraro
in the aftermath of her recent statements as harboring some deep -- deep-seated bias.
But race is an issue that I believe this nation cannot afford to ignore right now. We would be
making the same mistake that Reverend Wright made in his offending sermons about
America: to simplify and stereotype and amplify the negative to the point that it distorts
reality. The fact is that the comments that have been made and the issues that have surfaced
over the last few weeks reflect the complexities of race in this country that we've never really
worked through, a part of our union that we have not yet made perfect. And if we walk away
now, if we simply retreat into our respective corners, we will never be able to come together
and solve challenges like health care or education or the need to find good jobs for every
American.
Understanding -- Understanding this reality requires a reminder of how we arrived at this
point. As William Faulkner once wrote, "The past isn't dead and buried. In fact, it isn't even
past." We do not need to recite here the history of racial injustice in this country. But we do
need to remind ourselves that so many of the disparities that exist between the AfricanAmerican
community and the larger American community today can be traced directly to
inequalities passed on from an earlier generation that suffered under the brutal legacy of
slavery and Jim Crow. Segregated schools were, and are, inferior schools. We still haven't
fixed them, 50 years after Brown versus Board of Education. And the inferior education they
provided, then and now, helps explain the pervasive achievement gap between today's black
and white students.
Legalized discrimination, where blacks were prevented, often through violence, from owning
property, or loans were not granted to African-American business owners, or black
homeowners could not access FHA mortgages, or blacks were excluded from unions, or the
police force, or the fire department meant that black families could not amass any meaningful
wealth to bequeath to future generations. That history helps explain the wealth and income
gap between blacks and whites and the concentrated pockets of poverty that persist in so
many of today's urban and rural communities.
A lack of economic opportunity among black men and the shame and frustration that came
from not being able to provide for one's family contributed to the erosion of black families, a
problem that welfare policies for many years may have worsened. And the lack of basic
services in so many urban black neighborhoods -- parks for kids to play in, police walking the
beat, regular garbage pick-up, building code enforcement -- all helped create a cycle of
violence, blight, and neglect that continues to haunt us.
This is the reality in which Reverend Wright and other African-Americans of his generation
grew up. They came of age in the late '50s and early '60s, a time when segregation was still
the law of the land and opportunity was systematically constricted. What's remarkable is not
how many failed in the face of discrimination, but how many men and women overcame the
odds, how many were able to make a way out of no way for those like me who would come
after them.
But for all those who scratched and clawed their way to get a piece of the American Dream,
there were many who didn't make it -- those who were ultimately defeated, in one way or
another, by discrimination. That legacy of defeat was passed on to future generations -- those
young men and increasingly young women who we see standing on street corners or
languishing in our prisons, without hope or prospects for the future. Even for those blacks who
did make it, questions of race, and racism, continue to define their world view in fundamental
ways. For the men and women of Reverend Wright's generation, the memories of humiliation
and doubt and fear have not gone away, nor has the anger and the bitterness of those years.
That anger may not get expressed in public, in front of white co-workers or white friends, but
it does find voice in the barbershop or the beauty shop or around the kitchen table. At times,
that anger is exploited by politicians to gin up votes along racial lines or to make up for a
politician's own failings. And occasionally it finds voice in the church on Sunday morning, in
the pulpit and in the pews. The fact that so many people are surprised to hear that anger in
some of Reverend Wright's sermons simply reminds us of that old truism that the most
segregated hour of American life occurs on Sunday morning.
That -- That anger is not always productive. Indeed, all too often it distracts attention from
solving real problems. It keeps us from squarely facing our own complicity within the AfricanAmerican
community in our own condition. It prevents the African-American community from
forging the alliances it needs to bring about real change. But the anger is real; it is powerful,
and to simply wish it away, to condemn it without understanding its roots only serves to
widen the chasm of misunderstanding that exists between the races.
In fact, a similar anger exists within segments of the white community. Most working and
middle-class white Americans don't feel that they've been particularly privileged by their race.
Their experience is the immigrant experience. As far as they're concerned, no one handed
them anything; they built it from scratch. They've worked hard all their lives, many times only
to see their jobs shipped overseas or their pensions dumped after a lifetime of labor. They are
anxious about their futures, and they feel their dreams slipping away.
And in an era of stagnant wages and global competition, opportunity comes to be seen as a
zero sum game, in which your dreams come at my expense. So when they are told to bus
their children to a school across town, when they hear that an African American is getting an
advantage in landing a good job or a spot in a good college because of an injustice that they
themselves never committed, when they're told that their fears about crime in urban
neighborhoods are somehow prejudice, resentment builds over time.
Like the anger within the black community, these resentments aren't always expressed in
polite company. But they have helped shape the political landscape for at least a generation.
Anger over welfare and affirmative action helped forge the Reagan Coalition. Politicians
routinely exploited fears of crime for their own electoral ends. Talk show hosts and
conservative commentators built entire careers unmasking bogus claims of racism while
dismissing legitimate discussions of racial injustice and inequality as mere political correctness
or reverse racism. And just as black anger often proved counterproductive, so have these
white resentments distracted attention from the real culprits of the middle class squeeze: a
corporate culture rife with inside dealing, questionable accounting practices, and short-term
greed; a Washington dominated by lobbyists and special interests; economic policies that
favor the few over the many. And yet, to wish away the resentments of white Americans, to
label them as misguided or even racist without recognizing they are grounded in legitimate
concerns, this, too, widens the racial divide and blocks the path to understanding.
This is where we are right now.
It's a racial stalemate we've been stuck in for years. And contrary to the claims of some of my
critics, black and white, I have never been so naive as to believe that we can get beyond our
racial divisions in a single election cycle or with a single candidate, particularly -- particularly a
candidacy as imperfect as my own. But I have asserted a firm conviction, a conviction rooted
in my faith in God and my faith in the American people, that, working together, we can move
beyond some of our old racial wounds and that, in fact, we have no choice -- we have no
choice if we are to continue on the path of a more perfect union.
For the African-American community, that path means embracing the burdens of our past
without becoming victims of our past. It means continuing to insist on a full measure of justice
in every aspect of American life. But it also means binding our particular grievances, for better
health care and better schools and better jobs, to the larger aspirations of all Americans -- the
white woman struggling to break the glass ceiling, the white man who's been laid off, the
immigrant trying to feed his family. And it means also taking full responsibility for our own
lives -- by demanding more from our fathers, and spending more time with our children, and
reading to them, and teaching them that while they may face challenges and discrimination in
their own lives, they must never succumb to despair or cynicism. They must always believe --
They must always believe that they can write their own destiny.
Ironically, this quintessentially American -- and, yes, conservative -- notion of self-help found
frequent expression in Reverend Wright's sermons. But what my former pastor too often failed
to understand is that embarking on a program of self-help also requires a belief that society
can change. The profound mistake of Reverend Wright's sermons is not that he spoke about
racism in our society. It's that he spoke as if our society was static, as if no progress had been
made, as if this country -- a country that has made it possible for one of his own members to
run for the highest office in the land and build a coalition of white and black, Latino, Asian,
rich, poor, young and old -- is still irrevocably bound to a tragic past. What we know, what we
have seen, is that America can change. That is true genius of this nation. What we have
already achieved gives us hope -- the audacity to hope -- for what we can and must achieve
tomorrow.
Now, in the white community, the path to a more perfect union means acknowledging that
what ails the African-American community does not just exist in the minds of black people;
that the legacy of discrimination -- and current incidents of discrimination, while less overt
than in the past -- that these things are real and must be addressed. Not just with words, but
with deeds -- by investing in our schools and our communities; by enforcing our civil rights
laws and ensuring fairness in our criminal justice system; by providing this generation with
ladders of opportunity that were unavailable for previous generations. It requires all
Americans to realize that your dreams do not have to come at the expense of my dreams,
that investing in the health, welfare, and education of black and brown and white children will
ultimately help all of America prosper.
In the end, then, what is called for is nothing more and nothing less than what all the world's
great religions demand: that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us. Let us be
our brother's keeper, Scripture tells us. Let us be our sister's keeper. Let us find that common
stake we all have in one another, and let our politics reflect that spirit as well.
For we have a choice in this country. We can accept a politics that breeds division and conflict
and cynicism. We can tackle race only as spectacle, as we did in the O.J. trial; or in the wake
of tragedy, as we did in the aftermath of Katrina; or as fodder for the nightly news. We can
play Reverend Wright's sermons on every channel every day and talk about them from now
until the election, and make the only question in this campaign whether or not the American
people think that I somehow believe or sympathize with his most offensive words. We can
pounce on some gaffe by a Hillary supporter as evidence that she's playing the race card; or
we can speculate on whether white men will all flock to John McCain in the general election
regardless of his policies. We can do that. But if we do, I can tell you that in the next election,
we'll be talking about some other distraction, and then another one, and then another one.
And nothing will change.
That is one option.
Or, at this moment, in this election, we can come together and say, "Not this time." This time
we want to talk about the crumbling schools that are stealing the future of black children and
white children and Asian children and Hispanic children and Native-American children. This
time we want to reject the cynicism that tells us that these kids can't learn; that those kids
who don't look like us are somebody else's problem. The children of America are not "those
kids," -- they are our kids, and we will not let them fall behind in a 21st-century economy. Not
this time. This time we want to talk about how the lines in the emergency room are filled with
whites and blacks and Hispanics who do not have health care, who don't have the power on
their own to overcome the special interests in Washington, but who can take them on if we do
it together.
This time we want to talk about the shuttered mills that once provided a decent life for men
and women of every race, and the homes for sale that once belonged to Americans from
every religion, every region, every walk of life. This time we want to talk about the fact that
the real problem is not that someone who doesn't look like you might take your job; it's that
the corporation you work for will ship it overseas for nothing more than a profit. This time --
This time we want to talk about the men and women of every color and creed who serve
together, and fight together, and bleed together under the same proud flag. We want to talk
about how to bring them home from a war that should've never been authorized and
should've never been waged. And we want to talk about how we'll show our patriotism by
caring for them, and their families, and giving them the benefits that they have earned.
I would not be running for President if I didn't believe with all my heart that this is what the
vast majority of Americans want for this country. This union may never be perfect, but
generation after generation has shown that it can always be perfected. And today, whenever I
find myself feeling doubtful or cynical about this possibility, what gives me the most hope is
the next generation -- the young people whose attitudes and beliefs and openness to change
have already made history in this election.
There's one story in particular that I'd like to leave you with today, a story I told when I had
the great honor of speaking on Dr. King's birthday at his home church, Ebenezer Baptist, in
Atlanta. There's a young, 23-year-old woman, a white woman named Ashley Baia, who
organized for our campaign in Florence, South Carolina. She'd been working to organize a
mostly African-American community since the beginning of this campaign, and one day she
was at a roundtable discussion where everyone went around telling their story and why they
were there. And Ashley said that when she was 9 years old, her mother got cancer. And
because she had to miss days of work, she was let go and lost her health care. They had to
file for bankruptcy, and that's when Ashley decided that she had to do something to help her
mom.
She knew that food was one of their most expensive costs, and so Ashley convinced her
mother that what she really liked and really wanted to eat more than anything else was
mustard and relish sandwiches -- because that was the cheapest way to eat. That's the mind
of a 9 year old.
She did this for a year until her mom got better. And so Ashley told everyone at the
roundtable that the reason she had joined our campaign was so that she could help the
millions of other children in the country who want and need to help their parents too.
Now, Ashley might have made a different choice. Perhaps somebody told her along the way
that the source of her mother's problems were blacks who were on welfare and too lazy to
work, or Hispanics who were coming into the country illegally. But she didn't. She sought out
allies in her fight against injustice.
Anyway, Ashley finishes her story and then goes around the room and asks everyone else why
they're supporting the campaign. They all have different stories and different reasons. Many
bring up a specific issue. And finally they come to this elderly black man who's been sitting
there quietly the entire time. And Ashley asks him why he's there. And he doesn't bring up a
specific issue. He does not say health care or the economy. He does not say education or the
war. He does not say that he was there because of Barack Obama. He simply says to
everyone in the room, "I am here because of Ashley." "I'm here because of Ashley."
Now, by itself, that single moment of recognition between that young white girl and that old
black man is not enough. It is not enough to give health care to the sick, or jobs to the
jobless, or education to our children. But it is where we start. It is where our union grows
stronger. And as so many generations have come to realize over the course of the 221 years
since a band of patriots signed that document right here in Philadelphia, that is where
perfection begins.
Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you.
Thank you. What a wonderful reception. Thank you, Saint Paul. Thank you, Minnesota.
Thank you, JoAnn Syverson for the wonderful introduction. 
Thank you, Michelle Obama and Malia Obama and Sasha Obama. Thank you to my brothers 
and sisters. Thank you to my staff. Thank you to our volunteers. Thank you to my political
team. Thank you to our campaign manager, David Plouffe, who never gets any credit, but has 
built the best political organization in the country. 
Thank you to my grandmother, who helped raise me, and is sitting in Hawaii somewhere right
now because she can't travel, but who poured everything she had into me, and who helped to
make me the man I am today. Tonight is for her. 
Tonight, Minnesota, after 54 hard­fought contests, our primary season has finally come to an
end. Sixteen months have passed since we first stood together on the steps of the Old State 
Capitol in Springfield, Illinois. Thousands of miles have been traveled; millions of voices have 
been heard. 
And because of what you said, because you decided that change must come to Washington,  because you believed that this year must be different than all the rest, because you chose to
listen not to your doubts or your fears, but to your greatest hopes and highest aspirations, 
tonight we mark the end of one historic journey with the beginning of another, a journey that
will bring a new and better day to America. Because of you, tonight I can stand here and say 
that I will be the Democratic nominee for the President of the United States of America.
I want to thank all those in Montana and South Dakota who stood up for change today. I want
to thank every American who stood with us over the course of this campaign, through the 
good days and the bad, from the snows of Cedar Rapids to the sunshine of Sioux Falls. And,
tonight, I also want to thank the men and woman who took this journey with me as fellow
candidates for President. 
At this defining moment for our nation, we should be proud that our Party put forth one of the 
most talented, qualified field of individuals ever to run for office. I have not just competed 
with them as rivals. I’ve learned from them as friends, as public servants, and as patriots who
love America and are willing to work tirelessly to make this country better. They are leaders of 
this Party and leaders that America will turn to for years to come. 
And that is particularly true for the candidate who has traveled further on this journey than 
anyone else: Senator Hillary Clinton has made history in this campaign. She has made history 
not just because she’s a woman who has done what no woman has done before, but because 
she is a leader who inspires millions of Americans with her strength, her courage, and her 
commitment to the causes that brought us here tonight. I congratulate her on her victory in
South Dakota, and I congratulate her on the race that she has run throughout this contest.  We’ve certainly had our differences over the last 16 months. But as someone who’s shared a 
stage with her many times, I can tell you that what gets Hillary Clinton up in the morning ­­ 
even in the face of tough odds ­­ is exactly what sent her and Bill Clinton to sign up for their 
first campaign in Texas all those years ago, what sent her to work at the Children’s Defense 
Fund and made her fight for health care as first lady, what led her to the United States Senate 
and fueled her barrier­breaking campaign for the presidency: an unyielding desire to improve 
the lives of ordinary Americans, no matter how difficult the fight may be. 
And you can rest assured that when we finally win the battle for universal health care in this 
country ­­ and we will win that fight ­­ she will be central to that victory. When we transform 
our energy policy and lift our children out of poverty, it will be because she worked to help 
make it happen. Our Party and our country are better off because of her, and I am a better 
candidate for having had the honor to compete with Hillary Rodham Clinton. 
There are those who say that this primary has somehow left us weaker and more divided.  Well, I say that, because of this primary, there are millions of Americans who've cast their 
ballot for the very first time. There are Independents and Republicans who understand this 
election isn’t just about a change of Party in Washington, but also about the need to change 
Washington. There are young people, and African­Americans, and Hispanic­Americans, and 
women of all ages who have voted in numbers that have broken records and inspired a nation. 
All of you chose to support a candidate you believe in deeply. But at the end of the day, we 
aren’t the reason you came out and waited in lines that stretched block after block to make 
your voice heard. You didn’t do that because of me or Senator Clinton or anyone else. You did 
it because you know in your hearts that at this moment, a moment that will define a 
generation, we cannot afford to keep doing what we’ve been doing. We owe our children a 
better future. We owe our country a better future.
And for all those who dream of that future tonight, I say: Let us begin the work together. Let
us unite in common effort to chart a new course for America.
In just a few short months, the Republican Party will arrive in St. Paul with a very different
agenda. They will come here to nominate John McCain, a man who has served this country 
heroically. I honor, we honor the service of John McCain, and I respect his many 
accomplishments, even if he chooses to deny mine. My differences with him are not personal.  They are with the policies he has proposed in this campaign, because while John McCain can
legitimately tout moments of independence from his Party in the past, such independence has 
not been the hallmark of his presidential campaign. 
It’s not change when John McCain decided to stand with George Bush 95 percent of the time, 
as he did in the Senate last year.
It’s not change when he offers four more years of Bush economic policies that have failed to
create well­paying jobs, or insure our workers, or help Americans afford the skyrocketing cost
of college, policies that have lowered the real incomes of the average American family, and 
widened the gap between Wall Street and Main Street, and left our children with a mountain
of debt. 
It’s not change when he promises to continue a policy in Iraq that asks everything of our 
brave men and women in uniform and nothing of Iraqi politicians, a policy where all we look 
for are reasons to stay in Iraq, while we spend billions of dollars a month on a war that isn’t
making the American people any safer. So, I’ll say this: There are many words to describe 
John McCain’s attempt to pass off his embrace of George Bush’s policies as bipartisan and 
new, but “change” is not one of them. “Change” is not one of them, because change is a 
foreign policy that doesn’t begin and end with a war that should’ve never been authorized and 
never been waged. 
I won’t stand here and pretend that there are many good options left in Iraq, but what’s not
an option is leaving our troops in that country for the next hundred years, especially at a time 
when our military is overstretched, our nation is isolated, and nearly every other threat to
America is being ignored. We must be as careful getting out of Iraq as we were careless 
getting in, but start leaving we must. It’s time for Iraqis to take responsibility for their future. 
It’s time to rebuild our military and give our veterans the care and the benefits they deserve 
when they come home. 
It's time to refocus our efforts on Al Qaida’s leadership and Afghanistan, and rally the world 
against the common threats of the 21st century: terrorism and nuclear weapons, climate 
change and poverty, genocide and disease. That’s what change is. 
Change, Minnesota, is realizing that meetings [sic] today’s threats requires not just our 
firepower, but the power of our diplomacy: tough, direct diplomacy, where the President of 
the United States isn’t afraid to let any petty dictator know where America stands and what
we stand for. We must once again have the courage and the conviction to lead the free world.
That is the legacy of Roosevelt and Truman and Kennedy. That’s what the American people 
demand. That’s what change is. 
Change is building an economy that rewards not just wealth, but the work and the workers 
who created it. It’s understanding that the struggles facing working families can’t be solved by 
spending billions of dollars on more tax breaks for big corporations and wealthy CEOs, but by 
giving a middle­class tax break to those who need it, and investing in our crumbling 
infrastructure, and transforming how we use energy, and improving our schools, and renewing 
our commitment to science and innovation. It’s understanding that fiscal responsibility and 
shared prosperity can go hand­in­hand, as they did when Bill Clinton was President. 
John McCain has spent a lot of time talking about trips to Iraq in the last few weeks, but
maybe if he spent some time taking trips to the cities and towns that have been hardest hit by 
this economy ­­ cities in Michigan, and Ohio, and right here in Minnesota ­­ he’d understand 
the kind of change that people are looking for.
Maybe if he went to Iowa and met the student who works the night shift after a full day of 
class and still can’t pay the medical bills for a sister who’s ill, he’d understand she can’t afford 
four more years of a health care plan that only takes care of the healthy and the wealthy. She 
needs us to pass health care right now, a plan that guarantees insurance to every American
who wants it and brings down premiums for every family who needs it. That’s the change we 
need, Minnesota.
Maybe if John McCain went to Pennsylvania and he met the man who lost his job, but can’t
even afford the gas to drive around and look for a new one, he’d understand we can’t afford 
four more years of our addiction to oil from dictators. That man needs us to pass an energy 
policy that works with automakers to raise fuel standards, and makes corporations pay for 
their pollution, and oil companies invest their record profits in a clean energy future, an
energy policy that will create millions of new jobs that pay well and can’t be outsourced.
That’s the change we need, Minnesota.
And maybe if John McCain spent some time in the schools of South Carolina or St. Paul,  Minnesota, or where he spoke tonight in New Orleans, Louisiana, he’d understand that we 
can’t afford to leave the money behind for No Child Left Behind; that we owe it to our children
to invest in early­childhood education; and recruit an army of new teachers and give them 
better pay and more support; and finally decide that, in this global economy, the chance to
get a college education should not be a privilege for the few, but a birthright of every 
American. That’s the change we need in America. That’s why I’m running for President of the 
United States. 
Now, the other side will come here in September and offer a very different set of policies and 
positions, and that is a good thing. That is a debate I look forward to. It is a debate that the 
American people deserve on the issues that will help determine the future of this country and 
the future for our children. But what you don’t deserve is another election that’s governed by 
fear, and innuendo, and division. What you won’t hear from this campaign or this Party is the 
kind of politics that uses religion as a wedge and patriotism as a bludgeon.
What you won’t see from this campaign or this Party is a politics that sees our opponents not
as competitors to challenge, but enemies to polarize, because we may call ourselves 
Democrats and Republicans, but we are Americans first. We are always Americans first. 
Despite what the good senator from Arizona may have said tonight, I’ve seen people of 
differing views and opinions find common cause many times during my two decades in public 
life, and I’ve brought many together myself. I’ve walked arm­in­arm with community leaders 
on the south side of Chicago and watched tensions fade as black and white and Latino fought
together for good jobs and good schools. I’ve sat across the table from law enforcement
officials and civil rights advocates to reform a criminal justice system that sent 13 innocent
people to death row. I’ve worked with friends in the other Party to provide more children with
health insurance and more working families with a tax break, to curb the spread of nuclear 
weapons and ensure that the American people know where their tax dollars are being spent,  and to reduce the influence of lobbyists who have all too often set the agenda in Washington. 
In our country, I have found that this cooperation happens not because we agree on 
everything, but because, behind all the false labels and false divisions and categories that
define us, beyond all the petty bickering and point­scoring in Washington, Americans are a 
decent, generous, compassionate people, united by common challenges and common hopes.
And every so often, there are moments which call on that fundamental goodness to make this 
country great again. So it was for that band of patriots who declared in a Philadelphia hall the 
formation of a more perfect union, and for all those who gave on the fields of Gettysburg and 
Antietam their last full measure of devotion to save that same union. So it was for the 
greatest generation that conquered fear itself, and liberated a continent from tyranny, and 
made this country home to untold opportunity and prosperity. So it was for the workers who
stood out on the picket lines, the women who shattered glass ceilings, the children who
braved a Selma bridge for freedom’s cause. So it has been for every generation that faced 
down the greatest challenges and the most improbable odds to leave their children a world 
that’s better and kinder and more just. 
And so it must be for us. 
America, this is our moment. This is our time, our time to turn the page on the policies of the 
past, our time to bring new energy and new ideas to the challenges we face, our time to offer 
a new direction for this country that we love. 
The journey will be difficult. The road will be long. I face this challenge with profound humility 
and knowledge of my own limitations, but I also face it with limitless faith in the capacity of 
the American people.
Because if we are willing to work for it, and fight for it, and believe in it, then I am absolutely 
certain that, generations from now, we will be able to look back and tell our children that this 
was the moment when we began to provide care for the sick and good jobs to the jobless. 
This was the moment when the rise of the oceans began to slow and our planet began to heal.
This was the moment when we ended a war, and secured our nation, and restored our image 
as the last, best hope on Earth. 
This was the moment, this was the time when we came together to remake this great nation
so that it may always reflect our very best selves and our highest ideals. 
Thank you, Minnesota. God bless you. 
God bless the United States of America.
Thank you to the citizens of Berlin and thank you to the people of Germany. Let me thank 
Chancellor Merkel and Foreign Minister Steinmeier for welcoming me earlier today. Thank you
Mayor Wowereit, the Berlin Senate, the police, and most of all thanks to all of you for this 
extraordinary welcome. Thank you. 
I come to Berlin as so many of my countrymen have come before; although tonight, I speak 
to you not as a candidate for President, but as a citizen ­­ a proud citizen of the United States, 
and a fellow citizen of the world.
I know that I don’t look like the Americans who’ve previously spoken in this great city. The 
journey that led me here is improbable. My mother was born in the heartland of America, but
my father grew up herding goats in Kenya. His father ­­ my grandfather ­­ was a cook, a 
domestic servant to the British. 
At the height of the Cold War, my father decided, like so many others in the forgotten corners 
of the world, that his yearning ­­ his dream ­­ required the freedom and opportunity promised 
by the West. And so he wrote letter after letter to universities all across America until
somebody, somewhere answered his prayer for a better life. 
That is why I am here. And you are here because you too know that yearning. This city, of all
cities, knows the dream of freedom. And you know that the only reason we stand here tonight
is because men and women from both of our nations came together to work, and struggle,
and sacrifice for that better life.
Ours is a partnership that truly began 60 years ago this summer, on the day when the first
American plane touched down at Tempelhof. On that day much of this continent still lay in
ruin. The rubble of this city had yet to be built into a wall. The Soviet shadow had swept
across Eastern Europe, while in the West, America, Britain, and France took their stock of 
their losses, and pondered how the world might be remade.
This is where the two sides met. And on the twenty­fourth of June, 1948, the Communists 
chose to blockade the western part of the city. They cut off food and supplies to more than
two million Germans in an effort to extinguish the last flame of freedom in Berlin. 
The size of our forces was no match for the larger Soviet Army. And yet retreat would have 
allowed Communism to march across Europe. Where the last war had ended, another World 
War could have easily begun. And all that stood in the way was Berlin. And that’s when the 
airlift began, when the largest and most unlikely rescue in the history brought food and hope 
to the people of this city. 
The odds were stacked against success. In the winter, a heavy fog filled the sky above, and 
many planes were forced to turn back without dropping off the needed supplies. The streets 
where we stand were filled with hungry families who had no comfort from the cold.
But in the darkest hours, the people of Berlin kept the flame of hope burning. The people of 
Berlin refused to give up. And on one fall day, hundreds of thousands of Berliners came here,
to the Tiergarten, and heard the city’s mayor implore the world not to give up on freedom. 
“There is only one possibility,” he said. “For us to stand together united until this battle is 
won…The people of Berlin have spoken. We have done our duty," he said, "and we will keep 
on doing our duty. People of the world, now do your duty. People of the world, look at Berlin.”
People of the world ­­ look at Berlin!
Look at Berlin, where Germans and Americans learned to work together and trust each other 
less than three years after facing each other on the field of battle.
Look at Berlin, where the determination of a people met the generosity of the Marshall Plan 
and created a German miracle; where a ­­ where a victory over tyranny gave rise to NATO,
the greatest alliance ever formed to defend our common security. 
Look at Berlin, where the bullet holes in the buildings and the somber stones and pillars near 
the Brandenburg Gate insist that we never forget our common humanity. 
People of the world ­­ look at Berlin, where a wall came down, a continent came together, and 
history proved that there is no challenge too great for a world that stands as one. 
Sixty years after the airlift, we are called upon again. History has led us to a new crossroad,  with new promise and new peril.
When you, the German people, tore down that wall ­­ a wall that divided East and West; 
freedom and tyranny; fear and hope ­­ walls came tumbling down around the world. From 
Kiev to Cape Town, prison camps were closed, and the doors of democracy were opened.
Markets opened too, and the spread of information and technology reduced barriers to
opportunity and prosperity. While the 20th century taught us that we share a common
destiny, the 21st century has revealed a world more intertwined than at any time in human
history. 
The fall of the Berlin Wall brought new hope. But that very closeness has given rise to new
dangers that cannot be contained within the borders of a country or by the distance of an
ocean. 
Think about it: The terrorists of September 11th plotted in Hamburg and trained in Kandahar 
and Karachi before killing thousands from all over the globe on American soil. As we speak, 
cars in Boston and factories in Beijing are melting the ice caps in the Arctic, shrinking 
coastlines in the Atlantic, and bringing drought to farms from Kansas to Kenya.
Poorly secured nuclear material in the former Soviet Union, or secrets from a scientist in 
Pakistan could help build a bomb that detonates in Paris. The poppies in Afghanistan come to
Berlin in the form of the heroin. The poverty and violence in Somalia breeds the terror of 
tomorrow. The genocide in Darfur shames the conscience of us all. 
In this new world, such dangerous currents have swept along faster than our efforts to contain
them. And that is why we cannot afford to be divided. No one nation, no matter how large or 
powerful, can defeat such challenges alone. None of us can deny these threats, or escape 
responsibility in meeting them. In the absence of Soviet tanks and a terrible wall, it has 
become easy to forget this truth. And if we’re honest with each other, we know that 
sometimes, on both sides of the Atlantic, we have drifted apart, and forgotten our shared
destiny. 
In Europe, the view that America is part of what has gone wrong in our world, rather than a 
force to help us make it right, has become all too common. In America, there are voices that
deride and deny the importance of Europe’s role in our security and our future. Both views 
miss the truth: that Europeans today are bearing new burdens and taking more responsibility 
in critical parts of the world; and that just as American bases built in the last century still help 
to defend the security of this continent, so does our country still sacrifice greatly for freedom 
around the globe.
Yes, there have been differences between America and Europe. No doubt, there will be 
differences in the future. But the burdens of global citizenship continue to bind us together. A 
change of leadership in Washington will not lift this burden. In this new century, Americans 
and Europeans alike will be required to do more ­­ not less. Partnership and cooperation
among nations is not a choice; it is the only way, the one way, to protect our common
security and advance our common humanity.
That is why the greatest danger of all is to allow new walls to divide us from one another. The 
walls between old allies on either side of the Atlantic cannot stand. The walls between the 
countries with the most and those with the least cannot stand. The walls between races and 
tribes; natives and immigrants; Christians and Muslims and Jews cannot stand. These now are 
the walls we must tear down.  We know that these walls have fallen before. After centuries of strife, the people of Europe 
have formed a Union of promise and prosperity. Here, at the base of a column built to mark 
victory in war, we meet in the center of a Europe at peace. Not only have walls come down in
Berlin, but they've come down in Belfast, where Protestant and Catholic found a way to live 
together; in the Balkans, where our Atlantic alliance ended wars and brought savage war 
criminals to justice; and in South Africa, where the struggle of a courageous people defeated 
apartheid.
So history reminds us that walls can be torn down. But the task is never easy. True 
partnership and true progress requires constant work and sustained sacrifice. They require 
sharing the burdens of development and diplomacy; of peace and progress. They require allies 
who will listen to each other, learn from each other and, most of all, trust each other. 
That is why America cannot turn inward. That is why Europe cannot turn inward. America has 
no better partner than Europe. Now is the time to build new bridges across the globe as 
strong as the one that binds us across the Atlantic. Now is the time to join together, through
constant cooperation and strong institutions and shared sacrifice and a global commitment to
progress, to meet the challenges of the 21st century. It was this spirit that led airlift planes to
appear in the sky above our heads, and people to assemble where we stand today. And this is 
the moment when our nations ­­ and all nations ­­ must summon that spirit anew. 
This is the moment when we must defeat terror and dry up the well of extremism that 
supports it. This threat is real and we cannot shrink from our responsibility to combat it. If we 
could create NATO to face down the Soviet Union, we can join in a new and global partnership 
to dismantle the networks that have struck in Madrid and Amman; in London and Bali; in
Washington and New York. If we could win a battle of ideas against the communists, we can 
stand with the vast majority of Muslims who reject the extremism that leads to hate instead of 
hope.
This is the moment when we must renew our resolve to rout the terrorists who threaten our 
security in Afghanistan, and the traffickers who sell drugs on your streets. No one welcomes 
war. I recognize the enormous difficulties in Afghanistan. But my country and yours have a 
stake in seeing that NATO’s first mission beyond Europe’s borders is a success. For the people 
of Afghanistan, and for our shared security, the work must be done. America can't do this 
alone.  The Afghan people need our troops and your troops; our support and your support to
defeat the Taliban and al Qaeda, to develop their economy, and to help them rebuild their 
nation. We have too much at stake to turn back now.
This is the moment when we must renew the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.  The 
two superpowers that faced each other across the wall of this city came too close too often to
destroying all we have built and all that we love. With that wall gone, we need not stand idly 
by and watch the further spread of the deadly atom. It is time to secure all loose nuclear 
materials; to stop the spread of nuclear weapons; and to reduce the arsenals from another 
era. This is the moment to begin the work of seeking the peace of a world without nuclear 
weapons. 
This is the moment when every nation in Europe must have the chance to choose its own
tomorrow, free from the shadows of yesterday. In this century, we need a strong European
Union that deepens the security and prosperity of this continent, while extending a hand 
abroad. In this century ­­ in this city of all cities ­­ we must reject the Cold War mind­set of 
the past, and resolve to work with Russia when we can, to stand up for our values when we 
must, and to seek a partnership that extends across this entire continent. 
This is the moment when we must build on the wealth that open markets have created, and 
share the benefits more equitably. Trade has been a cornerstone of our growth and global
development. But we will not be able to sustain this growth if it favors the few, and not the 
many. Together we must forge trade that truly rewards the work that creates wealth, with
meaningful protections for our people and our planet. This is the moment for trade that is free 
and fair for all. 
This is the moment we must help answer the call for a new dawn in the Middle East. My 
country must stand with yours and with Europe in sending a direct message to Iran that it
must abandon its nuclear ambitions. We must support the Lebanese who've marched and bled 
for democracy, and the Israelis and the Palestinians who seek a secure and lasting peace. And 
despite past differences, this is the moment when the world should support the millions of 
Iraqis who seek to rebuild their lives, even as we pass responsibility to the Iraqi government
and finally bring this war to a close. 
This is the moment when we must come together to save this planet. Let us resolve that we 
will not leave our children to a world where the oceans rise and famine spreads and terrible 
storms devastate our lands. Let us resolve that all nations ­­ including my own ­­ will act with
the same seriousness of purpose as has your nation, and reduce the carbon we send into our 
atmosphere. This is the moment to give our children back their future. This is the moment to
stand as one. 
And this is the moment when we must give hope to those left behind in a globalized world. We 
must remember that the Cold War born in this city was not a battle for land or treasure. Sixty 
years ago, the planes that flew over Berlin did not drop bombs; instead they delivered food,
and coal, and candy to grateful children. And in that show of solidarity, those pilots won more 
than a military victory. They won hearts and minds; love and loyalty and trust ­­ not just from 
the people in this city, but from all those who heard the story of what they did here.
Now the world will watch and remember what we do here with this moment. Will we extend 
our hand to the people in the forgotten corners of this world who yearn for lives marked by 
dignity and opportunity, by security and justice? Will we lift the child in Bangladesh from 
poverty, and shelter the refugee in Chad, and banish the scourge of AIDS in our time? 
Will we stand for the human rights of the dissident in Burma, the blogger in Iran, or the voter 
in Zimbabwe? Will we give meaning to the words “never again” in Darfur? 
Will we acknowledge that there is no more powerful example than the one each of our nations 
projects to the world? Will we reject torture and stand for the rule of law? Will we welcome 
immigrants from different lands, and shun discrimination against those who don’t look like us 
or worship like we do, and keep the promise of equality and opportunity for all of our people? 
People of Berlin ­­ people of the world ­­ this is our moment. This is our time. 
I know my country has not perfected itself. At times, we’ve struggled to keep the promise of 
liberty and equality for all of our people. We’ve made our share of mistakes, and there are 
times when our actions around the world have not lived up to our best intentions. 
But I also know how much I love America. I know that for more than two centuries, we have 
strived ­­ at great cost and great sacrifice ­­ to form a more perfect union; to seek, with other 
nations, a more hopeful world. Our allegiance has never been to any particular tribe or 
kingdom ­­ indeed, every language is spoken in our country; every culture has left its imprint
on ours; every point of view is expressed in our public squares. What has always united us, 
what has always driven our people, what drew my father to America’s shores is a set of ideals 
that speak to aspirations shared by all people: that we can live free from fear and free from 
want; that we can speak our minds and assemble with whomever we choose and worship as 
we please. 
These are the aspirations that join the fates of all nations in this city. These aspirations are 
bigger than anything that drives us apart. It is because of these aspirations that the airlift
began. It is because of these aspirations that all free people ­­ everywhere ­­ became citizens 
of Berlin. It is in pursuit of these aspirations that a new generation ­­ our generation ­­ must
make our mark on the world.
People of Berlin, and people of the world, the scale of our challenge is great. The road ahead
will be long. But I come before you to say that we are heirs to a struggle for freedom. We are 
a people of improbable hope. With an eye toward the future, with resolve in our heart, let us 
remember this history, and answer our destiny, and remake the world once again. 
Thank you, Berlin. God bless you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam President. And thank you to the distinguished Senator from
Connecticut not only for yielding time, but also for the extraordinarily hard work that he's put
in over the last several days and, in fact, over a -- a week. And I want to thank his
counterparts on the other side, including Senator Gregg, for their hard work.
Now, the fact that we're even here voting on a plan to rescue our economy from the greed
and irresponsibility of Wall Street and some in Washington is an outrage. It's an outrage to
every American who works hard, pays their taxes, is doing their best every day to make a
better life for themselves and their families. And understandably, people are frustrated and
they're angry that Wall Street's mistakes have put their tax dollars at risk. And they should
be. I'm frustrated and angry, too.
But while there's plenty of blame to go around -- and many in Washington and Wall Street
who deserve it, all of us -- all of us have a responsibility to solve this crisis, because it affects
the financial well-being of every single American. There will be time to punish those who set
this fire, but now is not the time to argue about how it got set, or did the neighbor sleep in his
bed, or leave the stove on. Right now we want to put out that fire; and now's the time for us
to come together and do that.
When the House of Representatives failed to act on Monday, we saw the single largest decline
in the stock market in two decades. Over one trillion dollars of wealth was lost by the time the
markets closed. And it wasn't just the wealth of a few CEOs or Wall Street executives. The
401(k)s and retirement accounts of millions became smaller. The state pension funds of
teachers and government employees lost billions upon billions of dollars. Hard-working
Americans who invested their nest egg to watch it grow saw it diminish and in some cases
disappear.
And while that decline was devastating, the consequences of the credit crisis that caused it
will be even worse if we do not act now. We're in a very dangerous situation, where financial
institutions across this country are afraid to lend money. And if all that meant was the failure
of a few banks in New York, that would be one thing. But that's not what it means. What it
means is, if we don't act, it will be harder for Americans to get a mortgage for their home or
loans they need to buy a car or send their children to college.
What it means is that businesses won't be able to get the loans they need to open a new
factory or make payroll for their workers. And if they can't make payroll on Friday, then
workers are laid off on Monday. And if workers are laid off on Monday, then they can't pay
their bills or pay back their loans to somebody else. And it will go on and on and on, rippling
through the entire economy. And potentially we could see thousands of businesses close,
millions of jobs could be lost, and a long and painful recession could follow. In other words,
this is not just a Wall Street crisis; it's an American crisis. And it's the American economy that
needs this rescue plan.
I understand completely why people would be skeptical when this President asks for a blank
check to solve this problem. I was, too, as was Senator Dodd and a whole bunch of us here.
And that's why, over a week ago, I demanded that this plan include some specific proposals to
protect taxpayers, protections that the Administration eventually agreed to, and, thanks to the
hard work of Senator Dodd and Republican counterparts like Senator Gregg, we here in the
Senate have agreed to, and now hopefully the House will agree to, as well.
Let me just go over those principles:
Number one, I said we needed an independent board to provide oversight and
accountability for how and where this money is spent at every step of the way.
Number two, I said that we cannot help banks on Wall Street without helping the
millions of innocent homeowners who are struggling to stay in their homes. They
deserve a plan, too.
Number three, I said that I would not allow this plan to become a welfare program for
Wall Street executives, whose greed and irresponsibility got us into this mess.
And, finally, I said that, if American taxpayers are financing this solution, then they
have to be treated like investors. They should get every penny of their tax dollars back
once the economy recovers.
Now, this last part is important, because it's been the most misunderstood and poorly
communicated part of this plan. This is not a plan to just hand over 700 billion dollars of
taxpayer money to a few banks. If this is managed correctly -- and that's an important "if" --
we will hopefully get most or all of our money back and possibly even turn a profit on the
government's intervention, every penny of which will go directly back to the American people.
And if we fall short, we will levy a fee on financial institutions so that they can repay for the
losses that they caused.
Now, let me -- let's acknowledge, even with all these taxpayer protections, this plan is not
perfect. Democrats and Republicans in Congress have legitimate concerns about it. Some of
my closest colleagues, people I have the greatest respect for, still have problems with it and
may choose to vote against this bill, and I think that we can respectfully disagree. I
understand their frustrations.
I also know that many -- many Americans share their concerns. But it's clear that, from my
perspective, this is what we need to do right now to prevent the possibility of a crisis turning
into a catastrophe. It is conceivable -- it's possible that if we did nothing everything would
turn out okay. It's -- There -- There's a possibility that that's true. And there's no doubt that
there may be other plans out there that, had we had two or three or six months to develop,
might be even more refined and might serve our purposes better.
But we don't have that kind of time. And we can't afford to take a risk that the economy of
the United States of America and, as a consequence, the worldwide economy could be
plunged into a very, very deep hole. So to Democrats and Republicans who've opposed this
plan, I say: Step up to the plate. Let's do what's right for the country at this time, because
the time to act is now.
I know many Americans are wondering what happens next. And passing this bill can't be the
end of our work to strengthen our economy; it must be the beginning. Because one thing I --
I think all of us who may end up supporting this bill understand is that, even if we get this in
place, we could still have enormous problems and probably will have big problems in the
economy over the next several months and potentially longer; because the fact is, is that we
have seen some mismanagement of the fundamentals of the economy for a very long time,
and we are not going to dig ourselves out of that hole immediately.
So this is not the end. This is the beginning. As soon as we pass this rescue plan, we need to
move aggressively with the same sense of urgency to rescue families on Main Street who are
struggling to pay their bills and keep their jobs. They've been in crisis a lot longer than Wall
Street has.
I've said it before and I say it again: We need to pass an economic stimulus package that will
help ordinary Americans cope with rising food and gas prices, that can save one million jobs
rebuilding our schools, and roads, and our infrastructure, and help states and cities avoid
budget cuts and tax increase[s], a -- a plan that would extend expiring unemployment
benefits for those Americans who've lost their jobs and cannot find new ones. That's the right
thing to do at a time when consumer confidence is down and we are in great danger of
slipping into a big recession.
We also must do more in this rescue package in order to help homeowners stay in their
homes. I will continue to advocate bankruptcy reforms. I know my colleague from Illinois,
Dick Durbin, has been a strong champion of this, as have many. It is the right thing to do to
change our bankruptcy laws so that people have a better chance of staying in their homes and
we're not seeing communities devastated all across the country. And we should encourage
Treasury to study the option of buying individual mortgages, like we did successfully in the
1930s.
And finally, while we all hope that this rescue package succeeds, we should be prepared to
take more vigorous actions in the months ahead to rebuild capital, if it's necessary.
Now, just as families are planning for their future in tough times, Washington's going to have
to do the same. Runaway spending and record deficits are not how families run their budgets.
It can't be how Washington handles people's tax dollars. So we're going to have to return to
the fiscal responsibility we had in the 1990s. And the next White House and the next Congress
is going to have to work together to make sure that we go through our budget, we get rid of
programs that don't work, that we make the ones that do work better and cost less. With less
money flowing into the Treasury, some useful programs or policies might need to be delayed.
And some might be -- need to be stretched out over a longer period of time.
But there are certain investments in our future that we cannot delay, precisely because our
economy is in turmoil.
Mr. President, I've exceeded the time a little bit. I would like unanimous consent for a couple
more minutes.
Thank you.
There are certain investments in our future that we can't delay precisely be -- because the
economy's in turmoil. We can't wait to help Americans keep up with rising costs and shrinking
paychecks, and we're going to do that by making sure that we are giving our workers a
middle-class tax cut.
We can't wait to relieve the burden of crushing health care costs. We can't wait to create
millions of new jobs by rebuilding our roads and our bridges, and investing in broadband lines
in rural communities, and fixing our electricity grid so we can get renewable energy to
population centers that need them. And we need to develop an energy policy that prevents us
from sending 700 billion dollars a year to tyrants and dictators for their oil. We can't wait to
educate the next generation of Americans with the skills and knowledge they need to compete
with any workers anywhere in the world. These are the priorities we cannot delay.
Now, let me just close by saying this: I do not think this is going to be easy. It's not going to
come without costs. We are all going to need to sacrifice. We're all going to need to pull our
weight, because now, more than ever, we are all in this together. That's part of what this
crisis has taught us -- that in the end of the day, there's no real separation between Wall
Street and Main Street. There's only the road we're traveling on as Americans. And we will
rise or fall on that journey as one nation and as one people.
I know that many Americans are feeling anxiety right now about their jobs, about their
homes, about their life savings. But I also know this, that we can steer ourselves out of this
crisis. We are -- always have. During the great financial crisis of the last century, in his first
fireside chat, FDR told his fellow Americans that,
There is an element in the re-adjustment of our financial system more important than
currency, more important than gold, and that is the confidence of the people
themselves. Confidence and courage are the essentials of success in carrying out our
plan.
Let us unite in banishing fear. Together we cannot fail. We cannot fail, not now, not tomorrow,
not next year.
This is a nation that's faced down war and depression, great challenges and great threats. And
at each and every moment, we have risen to meet up these challenges, not as Democrats, not
as Republicans, but as Americans, with resolve and with confidence, with that fundamental
belief that, here in America, our destiny is not written for us, it's written by us. And that's who
we are. And that's the country I know we can be right now.
I want to thank again the extraordinary leadership of Chairman Dodd and Banking -- the
Banking Committee, as well as Chairman Baucus and Majority Leader Reid. They have worked
tirelessly. I want to thank the leadership in the House of Representatives.
I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting this important legislation, understanding that
this will not solve all our problems. It is a necessary but not sufficient step to make sure that
this economy once again works on behalf of all Americans in their pursuit of the American
dream.
Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the floor
Hello, Chicago. 
If there is anyone out there who still doubts that America is a place where all things are 
possible; who still wonders if the dream of our founders is alive in our time; who still
questions the power of our democracy, tonight is your answer.
It's the answer told by lines that stretched around schools and churches in numbers this 
nation has never seen; by people who waited three hours and four hours, many for the very 
first time in their lives, because they believed that this time must be different; that their 
voices could be that difference. 
It's the answer spoken by young and old, rich and poor, Democrat and Republican, black, 
white, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, disabled and not disabled ­­ Americans 
who sent a message to the world that we have never been just a collection of individuals or a 
collection of Red States and Blue States: we are, and always will be, the United States of 
America!
It's the answer that led those who have been told for so long by so many to be cynical, and 
fearful, and doubtful about what we can achieve to put their hands on the arc of history and 
bend it once more toward the hope of a better day.
It's been a long time coming, but tonight, because of what we did on this day, in this election,  at this defining moment, change has come to America.
A little bit earlier this evening, I received an extraordinarily gracious call from Senator McCain.  Senator McCain fought long and hard in this campaign, and he's fought even longer and 
harder for the country that he loves. He has endured sacrifices for America that most of us 
cannot begin to imagine. We are better off for the service rendered by this brave and selfless 
leader. I congratulate him; I congratulate Governor Palin for all that they've achieved, and I
look forward to working with them to renew this nation's promise in the months ahead. 
I want to thank my partner in this journey, a man who campaigned from his heart and spoke 
for the men and women he grew up with on the streets of Scranton and rode with on the train
home to Delaware, the Vice President­elect of the United States, Joe Biden. 
And I would not be standing here tonight without the unyielding support of my best friend for 
the last 16 years, the rock of our family, the love of my life, the nation's next First Lady: 
Michelle Obama. Sasha and Malia, I love you both more than you can imagine, and you have 
earned the new puppy that's coming with us to the White House. And while she's no longer 
with us, I know my grandmother's watching, along with the family that made me who I am. I
miss them tonight, and I know that my debt to them is beyond measure. To my sister Maya,
my sister Alma, all my other brothers and sisters ­­ thank you so much for the support that
you've given me. I am grateful to them. 
And to my campaign manager, David Plouffe ­­ the unsung hero of this campaign, who built
the best political campaign, I think, in the history of the United States of America. To my chief 
strategist David Axelrod ­­ who's been a partner with me every step of the way. To the best
campaign team ever assembled in the history of politics ­­ you made this happen, and I am 
forever grateful for what you've sacrificed to get it done.
But above all, I will never forget who this victory truly belongs to. It belongs to you. It
belongs to you. I was never the likeliest candidate for this office. We didn't start with much
money or many endorsements. Our campaign was not hatched in the halls of Washington. It
began in the backyards of Des Moines and the living rooms of Concord and the front porches 
of Charleston. It was built by working men and women who dug into what little savings they 
had to give 5 dollars and 10 dollars and 20 dollars to the cause. It grew strength from the 
young people who rejected the myth of their generation's apathy, who left their homes and 
their families for jobs that offered little pay and less sleep. It drew strength from the not­so­  young people who braved the bitter cold and scorching heat to knock on doors of perfect
strangers, and from the millions of Americans who volunteered and organized and proved that
more than two centuries later a government of the people, by the people, and for the people 
has not perished from the Earth. This is your victory. 
And I know you didn't do this just to win an election. And I know you didn't do it for me. You
did it because you understand the enormity of the task that lies ahead. For even as we 
celebrate tonight, we know the challenges that tomorrow will bring are the greatest of our 
lifetime: two wars, a planet in peril, the worst financial crisis in a century. Even as we stand 
here tonight, we know there are brave Americans waking up in the deserts of Iraq and the 
mountains of Afghanistan to risk their lives for us. There are mothers and fathers who will lie 
awake after the children fall asleep and wonder how they'll make the mortgage or pay their
doctors' bills or save enough for their child's college education. There's new energy to
harness, new jobs to be created, new schools to build, and threats to meet, alliances to repair. 
The road ahead will be long. Our climb will be steep. We may not get there in one year or 
even in one term. But, America, I have never been more hopeful than I am tonight that we 
will get there. I promise you, we as a people will get there. 
There will be setbacks and false starts. There are many who won't agree with every decision
or policy I make as President. And we know the government can't solve every problem. But I
will always be honest with you about the challenges we face. I will listen to you, especially 
when we disagree. And, above all, I will ask you to join in the work of remaking this nation,  the only way it's been done in America for 221 years ­­ block by block, brick by brick, 
calloused hand by calloused hand. What began 21 months ago in the depths of winter cannot
end on this autumn night. 
This victory alone is not the change we seek. It is only the chance for us to make that change.
And that cannot happen if we go back to the way things were. It can't happen without you,  without a new spirit of service, a new spirit of sacrifice. So let us summon a new spirit of 
patriotism, of responsibility, where each of us resolves to pitch in and work harder and look 
after not only ourselves but each other. Let us remember that, if this financial crisis taught us 
anything, it's that we cannot have a thriving Wall Street while Main Street suffers. In this 
country, we rise or fall as one nation, as one people. Let's resist the temptation to fall back on
the same partisanship and pettiness and immaturity that has poisoned our politics for so long.
Let's remember that it was a man from this state who first carried the banner of the 
Republican Party to the White House, a Party founded on the values of self­reliance and 
individual liberty and national unity. Those are values that we all share. And while the 
Democratic Party has won a great victory tonight, we do so with a measure of humility and 
determination to heal the divides that have held back our progress. As Lincoln said to a nation
far more divided than ours: "We are not enemies but friends...." "Though passion may have 
strained, it must not break our bonds of affection."¹ 
And to those Americans who whose support I have yet to earn, I may not have won your vote 
tonight, but I hear your voices. I need your help. And I will be your President, too. 
And to all those watching tonight from beyond our shores, from parliaments and palaces, to
those who are huddled around radios in the forgotten corners of the world, our stories are 
singular, but our destiny is shared, and a new dawn of American leadership is at hand.
To those who would tear the world down: We will defeat you. To those who seek peace and 
security: We support you. And to all those who have wondered if America's beacon still burns 
as bright: Tonight we've proved once more that the true strength of our nation comes not
from the might of our arms or the scale of our wealth, but from the enduring power of our 
ideals: democracy, liberty, opportunity, and unyielding hope.
That's the true genius of America: that America can change. Our union can be perfected. What 
we've already achieved gives us hope for what we can and must achieve tomorrow. 
This election had many firsts and many stories that will be told for generations. But one that's 
on my mind tonight's about a woman who cast her ballot in Atlanta. She's a lot like the 
millions of others who stood in line to make their voice heard in this election except for one 
thing: Ann Nixon Cooper is 106 years old.
She was born just a generation past slavery; a time when there were no
cars on the road or planes in the sky; when someone like her couldn't vote for two reasons: 
because she was a woman and because of the color of her skin. 
And tonight, I think about all that she's seen throughout her century in America ­­ the 
heartache and the hope; the struggle and the progress; the times we were told that we can't,  and the people who pressed on with that American creed: Yes we can. 
At a time when women's voices were silenced and their hopes dismissed, she lived to see 
them stand up and speak out and reach for the ballot: Yes we can. 
When there was despair in the dust bowl and depression across the land, she saw a nation
conquer fear itself with a New Deal, new jobs, a new sense of common purpose: Yes we can. 
When the bombs fell on our harbor and tyranny threatened the world, she was there to
witness a generation rise to greatness and a democracy was saved: Yes we can. 
She was there for the buses in Montgomery, the hoses in Birmingham, a bridge in Selma, and 
a preacher from Atlanta who told a people that "we shall overcome": Yes we can. 
A man touched down on the moon, a wall came down in Berlin, a world was connected by our 
own science and imagination. 
And this year, in this election, she touched her finger to a screen, and cast her vote, because 
after 106 years in America, through the best of times and the darkest of hours, she knows 
how America can change: Yes we can. 
America, we have come so far. We have seen so much. But there is so much more to do. So
tonight, let us ask ourselves ­­ if our children should live to see the next century; if my 
daughters should be so lucky to live as long as Ann Nixon Cooper, what change will they see? 
What progress will we have made?
This is our chance to answer that call. This is our moment. This is our time, to put our people 
back to work and open doors of opportunity for our kids; to restore prosperity and promote 
the cause of peace; to reclaim the American dream and reaffirm that fundamental truth, that,  out of many, we are one;² that while we breathe, we hope. And where we are met with
cynicism and doubt and those who tell us that we can't, we will respond with that timeless 
creed that sums up the spirit of a people: Yes, we can. 
Thank you. 
God bless you. 
And may God bless the United States of America.
This morning we woke up to more sobering news about the state of our economy. The 
240,000 jobs lost in October marks the 10th consecutive month that our economy has shed 
jobs. In total, we've lost nearly 1.2 million jobs this year, and more than 10 million Americans 
are now unemployed. Tens of millions of families are struggling to figure out how to pay the 
bills and stay in their homes. Their stories are an urgent reminder that we are facing the 
greatest economic challenge of our lifetime, and we're going to have to act swiftly to resolve 
it.
Now, the United States has only one government and one President at a time, and until
January 20th of next year, that government is the current Administration. I've spoken to
President Bush. I appreciate his commitment to ensuring that his economic policy team keeps 
us fully informed as developments unfold. And I'm also thankful for his invitation to the White 
House.
Immediately after I become President, I'm going to confront this economic crisis head­on by 
taking all necessary steps to ease the credit crisis, help hardworking families, and restore 
growth and prosperity. This morning I met with members of my Transition Economic Advisory 
Board, who are standing behind me, alongside my Vice President­elect, Joe Biden. They will
help to guide the work of my transition team, working with Rahm Emanuel, my Chief of Staff, 
in developing a strong set of policies to respond to this crisis. 
We discussed in the earlier meeting several of the most immediate challenges facing our 
economy and key priorities on which to focus on in the days and weeks ahead.
First of all, we need a rescue plan for the middle class that invests in immediate efforts to
create jobs and provide relief to families that are watching their paychecks shrink and their 
life savings disappear. A particularly urgent priority is a further extension of ­­ of 
unemployment insurance benefits for workers who cannot find work in the increasingly weak 
economy. A fiscal stimulus plan that will jump­start economic growth is long overdue. I've 
talked about it throughout this ­­ the last few months of the campaign. We should get it done.
Second, we have to address the spreading impact of the financial crisis on the other sectors of 
our economy ­­ small businesses that are struggling to meet their payrolls and finance their 
holiday inventories, and state and municipal governments facing devastating budget cuts and 
tax increases. We must also remember that the financial crisis is increasingly global and 
requires a global response. 
The news coming out of the auto industry this week reminds us of the hardship it faces ­­  hardship that goes far beyond individual auto companies to the countless suppliers, small
businesses, and communities throughout our nation who depend on a vibrant American auto
industry. The auto industry is the backbone of American manufacturing and a critical part of 
our attempt to reduce our dependence on foreign oil. 
I would like to see the Administration do everything it can to accelerate the retooling 
assistance that Congress has already enacted. In addition, I have made it a high priority for 
my transition team to work on additional policy options to help the auto industry adjust,  weather the financial crisis, and succeed in producing fuel­efficient cars here in the United 
States of America. And I was glad to be joined today by Governor Jennifer Granholm, who
obviously has great knowledge and great interest on this issue. I've asked my team to explore 
what we can do under current law and whether additional legislation will be needed for this 
purpose. 
Third, we will review the implementation of this Administration's financial program to ensure 
that the government's efforts are achieving their central goal of stabilizing financial markets 
while protecting taxpayers, helping homeowners, and not unduly rewarding the management
of financial firms that are receiving government assistance. It is absolutely critical that the 
Treasury work closely with the FDIC, HUD, and other government agencies to use the 
substantial authority that they already have to help families avoid foreclosure and stay in their 
homes. 
Finally, as we monitor and address these immediate economic challenges, we will be moving 
forward in laying out a set of policies that will grow our middle class and strengthen our 
economy in the long term. We cannot afford to wait on moving forward on the key priorities 
that I identified during the campaign, including clean energy, health care, education, and tax 
relief for middle­class families. My transition team will be working on each of these priorities in
the weeks ahead, and I intend to reconvene this advisory board to discuss the best ideas for 
responding to these immediate problems.
Let me close by saying this: I do not underestimate the enormity of the task that lies ahead.  We have taken some major action to date, and we will need further action during this 
transition and subsequent months. Some of the choices that we make are going to be difficult.  And I have said before and I will repeat again: It is not going to be quick and it is not going to
be easy for us to dig ourselves out of the hole that we are in, but America is a strong and 
resilient country. And I know we will succeed if we put aside partisanship and politics and 
work together as one nation. That's what I intend to do.
Let me begin by thanking the bipartisan group of U.S. Governors who convened this meeting.
Few challenges facing America ­­ and the world ­­ are more urgent than combating climate 
change. The science is beyond dispute and the facts are clear. Sea levels are rising. Coastlines 
are shrinking. We’ve seen record drought, spreading famine, and storms that are growing 
stronger with each passing hurricane season. 
Climate change and our dependence on foreign oil, if left unaddressed, will continue to
weaken our economy and threaten our national security. 
I know many of you are working to confront this challenge. In particular, I want to commend 
Governor Sebelius, Governor Doyle, Governor Crist, Governor Blagojevich and your host,  Governor Schwarzenegger. All of you have shown true leadership in the fight to combat global
warming. And we’ve also seen a number of businesses doing their part by investing in clean
energy technologies. 
But too often, Washington has failed to show the same kind of leadership. That will change 
when I take office. My presidency will mark a new chapter in America’s leadership on climate 
change that will strengthen our security and create millions of new jobs in the process. That
will start with a federal cap and trade system.
We'll establish strong annual targets that set us on a course to reduce emissions to their 1990 
levels by 2020 and reduce them an additional 80% by 2050. Further, we'll invest 15 billion
dollars each year to catalyze private sector efforts to build a clean energy future. We'll invest
in solar power, wind power, and next­generation biofuels. We'll tap nuclear power, while 
making sure it’s safe; and we'll develop clean coal technologies. 
This investment will not only help us reduce our dependence on foreign oil, making the United 
States more secure; and it will not only help us bring about a clean energy future, saving the 
planet. It will also help us transform our industries and steer our country out of this economic 
crisis by generating five million new green jobs that pay well and can’t be outsourced.
The truth is, the United States can't meet this challenge alone. Solving this problem will
require all of us working together. I understand that your meeting is being attended by 
government officials from over a dozen countries, including the UK, Canada, Mexico, Brazil
and Chile, Poland and Australia, India and Indonesia. And I look forward to working with all
nations to meet this challenge in the coming years. 
Let me also say a special word to the delegates from around the world who will gather at
Poland next month. Your work is vital to the planet. While I won’t be President at the time of 
your meeting and while the United States has only one President at a time, I’ve asked 
Members of Congress who are attending the conference as observers to report back to me on 
what they learn there. And once I take office, you can be sure that the United States will once 
again engage vigorously in these negotiations, and help lead the world toward a new era of 
global cooperation on climate change.
Now is the time to confront this challenge once and for all. Delay is no longer an option.  Denial is no longer an acceptable response. The stakes are too high; the consequences too
serious. Stopping climate change won’t be easy and it won’t happen overnight. But I promise 
you this: When I am President, any governor who’s willing to promote clean energy will have 
a partner in the White House. Any company that’s willing to invest in clean energy will have 
an ally in Washington. And any nation that’s willing to join the cause of combating climate 
change will have an ally in the United States of America.
Thank you
The news this past week, including this morning’s news about Citigroup, has made it even
more clear that we are facing an economic crisis of historic proportions. Our financial markets 
are under stress. New home purchases in October were the lowest in half­a­century. Recently, 
more than half­a­million jobless claims were filed, the highest in 18 years. And if we do not
act swiftly and boldly, most experts now believe that we could lose millions of jobs next year.
While we can’t underestimate the challenges that we face, we also can’t underestimate our 
capacity to overcome them, to summon that spirit of determination and optimism that has 
always defined us, and to move forward in a new direction to create new jobs, reform our 
financial system, and fuel long­term economic growth.  We know this won’t be easy, and it won’t happen overnight. We’ll need to bring together the 
best minds in America to guide us, and that is what I’ve sought to do in assembling my 
economic team. I’ve sought leaders who could offer both sound judgment and fresh thinking,
both a depth of experience and a wealth of bold, new ideas, and most of all who share my 
fundamental belief that we cannot have a thriving Wall Street without a thriving Main Street,  that in this country we rise or fall as one nation, as one people.
Today, Vice President­elect Biden and I are pleased to announce the nomination of four 
individuals who meet these criteria to lead our economic team: Timothy Geithner, as secretary 
of treasury; Lawrence Summers, as the director of our National Economic Council; Christina 
Romer, as chair of the Council of Economic Advisers; and Melody Barnes, as director of the 
Domestic Policy Council.
Having served in senior roles at Treasury, the IMF, and the New York Fed, Tim Geithner offers 
not just extensive experience shaping economic policy and managing financial markets, he 
also has an unparalleled understanding of our current economic crisis in all of its depth,  complexity, and urgency. Tim will waste no time getting up to speed. He will start his first day 
on the job with a unique insight into the failures of today’s markets and a clear vision of the 
steps we must take to revive them. The reality is that the economic crisis we face is no longer 
just an American crisis; it’s a global crisis. And we will need to reach out to countries around 
the world to craft a global response. Tim’s extensive international experience makes him 
uniquely suited to do that work. 
Growing up partly in Africa and having lived and worked throughout Asia, having served as 
undersecretary of the treasury for international affairs, one of the many roles in the 
international arena, and having studied both Chinese and Japanese, Tim understands the 
language of today’s international markets in more ways than one. Tim served with distinction
under both Democrats and Republicans and has a long history of working comfortably and as 
an honest broker on both sides of the aisle. With stellar performances and outstanding results 
at every stage of his career, Tim has earned the confidence and respect of business, financial,  and community leaders, members of Congress, and political leaders around the world. And I
know he will do so once again as America’s next treasury secretary, the chief economic 
spokesman for my Administration. 
Now, like Tim, Larry Summers also brings a singular combination of skill, intellect, and 
experience to the role he will play in our Administration. As undersecretary, deputy secretary, 
and then secretary of the treasury, Larry helped guide us through several major international
financial crises and was a central architect of the policies that led to the longest economic 
expansion in American history, with record surpluses, rising family incomes, and more than 20 
million new jobs. He also championed a range of measures, from tax credits to enhanced 
lending programs to consumer financial protections, that greatly benefited middle­income 
families. 
As a thought leader, Larry has urged us to confront the problems of income inequality and the 
middle­class squeeze, consistently arguing that the key to a strong economy is a strong,
vibrant, growing middle class. This idea is at the core of my own economic philosophy and will
be the foundation of all of my economic policies. 
And as one of the great economic minds of our time, Larry has earned a global reputation for 
being able to cut to the heart of the most complex and novel policy challenges. With respect
to both our current financial crisis and other pressing economic issues of our time, his 
thinking, writing, and speaking have set the terms of the debate. I’m glad he will be by my 
side, playing the critical role of coordinating my Administration’s economic policy in the White 
House, and I will rely heavily on his advice as we navigate the uncharted waters of this 
economic crisis.
As one of the most expert people in America on economic crises and how to solve them, my 
next nominee, Christina Romer, will bring a critically needed perspective to her work as chair 
of my Council of Economic Advisors. Christina is both a leading macroeconomist and a leading 
economic historian, perhaps best known for her work on America’s recovery from the Great 
Depression and the robust economic expansion that followed.
Since 2003, she’s been co­director of the National Bureau of Economic Research Monetary 
Economics program. She’s also a member of the bureau’s Business Cycle Dating Committee,
the body charged with officially determining whether a recession has started and ended,
experience which will serve her well as she advises me on our current economic challenges. 
Christina has done groundbreaking research on many of the topics our Administration will
confront, from tax policy to fighting recessions. And her clear­eyed, independent analyses 
have received praise from both conservative and liberal thinkers alike. I look forward to her 
wise counsel in the White House. 
Finally, we know that rebuilding our economy will require action on a great variety of fronts: 
from education and health care to energy and Social Security. Without sound policies in these 
areas, we can neither enjoy sustained economic growth nor realize our full potential as a 
people. So I am extraordinarily pleased that Melody Barnes, one of the most respected policy 
experts in America, will serve as my director of the Domestic Policy Council, and that she will
be working hand in hand with my economic policy team to chart a course to economic 
recovery. An integral part of that course will be health care reform, and she will work closely 
with my secretary of health and human services on that issue.
As executive vice president for policy at the Center for American Progress, Melody directed a 
network of policy experts dedicated to finding solutions for struggling middle­class families. 
She also served as chief counsel to the great Senator Ted Kennedy on the Senate Judiciary 
Committee, working on issues ranging from crime to immigration to bankruptcy, and fighting 
tirelessly to protect civil rights, women’s rights, and religious freedom. Melody’s brilliant legal
mind and her long experience working to secure the liberties on which this nation was 
founded, as well as to secure the opportunities for those who’ve been left behind, make her a 
perfect fit for DPC director. 
I'm grateful that Tim, Larry, Christina, and Melody have accepted my nomination, and I am 
looking forward to working closely with them in the months ahead. That work starts today, 
because the truth is, we do not have a minute to waste. Right now, our economy is trapped in
a vicious cycle: The turmoil on Wall Street means a new round of belt­tightening for families 
and businesses on Main Street, and as folks produce less and consume less, that just deepens 
the problems in our financial markets. These extraordinary stresses on our financial system 
require extraordinary policy responses. And my Administration will honor the public 
commitments made by the current Administration to address this crisis. 
Further, beyond any immediate actions we may take, we need a recovery plan for both Wall
Street and Main Street, a plan that stabilizes our financial system and gets credit flowing
again, while at the same time addressing our growing foreclosure crisis, helping our struggling 
auto industry, and creating and saving 2.5 million jobs, jobs rebuilding our infrastructure, our 
roads, our bridges, modernizing our schools, and creating the clean energy infrastructure of 
the 21st century. Because at this moment, we need to restore both confidence in the markets 
and restore confidence of middle­class families, who find themselves working harder, earning 
less, and falling further and further behind.
I’ve asked my economic team to develop recommendations for this plan and to consult with
Congress, the current Administration, and the Federal Reserve on immediate economic 
developments over the next two months. I’ve requested that they brief me on these matters 
on a daily basis. And in the coming weeks, I will provide the American people and the 
incoming Congress with an overview of their initial recommendations. It is my hope that the 
new Congress will begin work on an aggressive economic recovery plan when they convene in
early January so that our Administration can hit the ground running.
With our economy in distress, we cannot hesitate and we cannot delay. Our families can’t
afford to keep on waiting and hoping for a solution. They can’t afford to watch another month
of unpaid bills pile up, another semester of tuition slip out of reach, another month where, 
instead of saving for retirement, they’re dipping into their savings just to get by. And I want
to repeat: This will not be easy. There are no shortcuts or quick fixes to this crisis, which has 
been many years in the making, and the economy is likely to get worse before it gets better. 
Full recovery will not happen immediately. And to make the investments we need, we’ll have 
to scour our federal budget, line by line, and make meaningful cuts and sacrifices, as well,  something I’ll be discussing further tomorrow. 
Despite all of this, I am hopeful about the future. I have full confidence in the wisdom and 
ingenuity of my economic team and in the hard work, courage, and sacrifice of the American
people. And most of all, I believe deeply in the resilience and the spirit of this nation. I know
we can work our way out of this crisis because we’ve done it before. And I know we will
succeed once again if we put aside partisanship and politics and work together. 
That’s exactly what I intend to do as President of the United States.
Good morning, everybody. I hope you all had a wonderful Thanksgiving.
Last week, we announced our economic team, which is working as we speak to craft an
Economic Recovery Program to create jobs and grow our struggling economy. Today, Vice
President-elect Biden and I are pleased to announce our national security team.
The national security challenges we face are just as grave -- and just as urgent -- as our
economic crisis. We are fighting two wars. Our old conflicts remain unresolved, and newly
assertive powers have put strains on the international system. The spread of nuclear weapons
raises the peril that the world’s deadliest technologies could fall into dangerous hands. Our
dependence on foreign oil empowers authoritarian governments and endangers our planet.
America must also be strong at home to be strong abroad. We need to provide education and
opportunity to all our citizens, so every American can compete with anyone, anywhere. And
our economic power must sustain our military strength, our diplomatic leverage, and our
global leadership.
The common thread linking these challenges is the fundamental reality that in the 21st
century, our destiny is shared with the world's. From our markets to our security, from our
public health to our climate, we must act with the understanding that, now more than ever,
we have a stake in what happens across the globe. And as we learned so painfully on 9/11,
terror cannot be contained by borders, nor safety provided by oceans alone.
Last week, we were reminded of this threat once again when terrorists took the lives of six
American among nearly 200 victims in Mumbai. In the world we seek, there is no place for
those who kill innocent civilians to advance hateful extremism. This weekend, I told Prime
Minister Singh of India that Americans stand with the people of India in this dark time. And I
am confident that India's great democracy is more resilient than killers who would tear it
down.
And so, in this uncertain world, the time has come for a new beginning -- a new dawn of
American leadership to overcome the challenges of the 21st century, and to seize the
opportunities embedded in those challenges. We will strengthen our capacity to defeat our
enemies and support our friends. We will renew old alliances and forge new and enduring
partnerships. We will show the world once more that America is relentless in the defense of
our people, steady in advancing our interests, and committed to the ideals that shine as a
beacon to the world: democracy and justice; opportunity and unyielding hope -- because
American values are America’s greatest export to the world.
To succeed, we must pursue a new strategy that skillfully uses, balances, and integrates all
elements of American power: our military and diplomacy; our intelligence and law
enforcement; our economy and the power of our moral example. The team that we've
assembled here today is uniquely suited to do just that.
In their past service and plans for the future, these men and women represent all of those
elements of American power, and the very best of the American example. They've served in
uniform and as diplomats; they have worked as legislators, law enforcement officials, and
executives. They share my pragmatism about the use of power, and my sense of purpose
about America's role as a leader in the world.
I have known Hillary Clinton as a friend, a colleague, a source of counsel, and as a campaign
opponent. She possesses an extraordinary intelligence and a remarkable work ethic. I am
proud that she will be our next Secretary of State. She is an American of tremendous stature
who will have my complete confidence, who knows many of the world's leaders, who will
command respect in every capitol, and who will clearly have the ability to advance our
interests around the world.Hillary’s appointment is a sign to friend and foe of the seriousness of my commitment to
renew American diplomacy and restore our alliances. There is much to do -- from preventing
the spread of nuclear weapons to Iran and North Korea, to seeking a lasting peace between
Israel and the Palestinians, to strengthening international institutions. I have no doubt that
Hillary Clinton is the right person to lead our State Department, and to work with me in
tackling this ambitious foreign policy agenda.
At a time when we face unprecedented transition amidst two wars, I've have asked Robert
Gates to continue as Secretary of Defense, and I'm pleased that he's accepted. Two years
ago, he took over the Pentagon at a difficult time. He restored accountability. He won the
confidence of military commanders and the trust of our brave men and women in uniform, as
well as their families. He earned the respect of members of Congress on both sides of the aisle
for his pragmatism and competence. He knows that we need a sustainable national security
strategy -- and that includes a bipartisan consensus at home.
As I said throughout the campaign, I will be giving Secretary Gates and our military a new
mission as soon as I take office: responsibly ending the war in Iraq through a successful
transition to Iraqi control. We will also ensure that we have the strategy and resources to
succeed against al Qaeda and the Taliban. As Bob said not too long ago, Afghanistan is where
the war on terror began, and it is where it must end. And going forward, we will continue to
make the investments necessary to strengthen our military and increase our ground forces to
defeat the threats of the 21st century.
Eric Holder has the talent and commitment to succeed as Attorney General from his first day
on the job, which is even more important in a transition that demands vigilance. He has
distinguished himself as a prosecutor, a judge, and a senior official, and he is deeply familiar
with the law enforcement challenges we face -- from terrorism to counter-intelligence, from
white collar crime to public corruption. Eric also has the combination of toughness and
independence that we need at the Justice Department. Let me be clear: The Attorney General
serves the American people. And I have every expectation that Eric will protect our people,
uphold the public trust, and adhere to our Constitution.
Janet Napolitano offers the experience and executive skills we need in the next Secretary of
Homeland Security. She has spent her career protecting people -- as a US Attorney, an
Attorney General, and as the Governor of Arizona. She understands the need for a
Department of Homeland Security that has the capacity to help prevent terrorist attacks and
respond to catastrophe -- be it manmade or natural. Janet assumes this critical role having
learned the lessons -- some of them painful -- of the last several years, from 9/11 to Katrina.
She insists on competence and accountability. She knows firsthand the need to have a partner
in Washington that works well with state and local governments. She understands as well as
anyone the danger of an unsecure border. And she will be a leader who can reform a
sprawling Department while safeguarding our homeland.Susan Rice will take on the crucial task of serving as Permanent Representative of the United
States to the United Nations. Susan has been a close and trusted advisor. As in previous
Administrations, the UN Ambassador will serve as a member of my cabinet and an integral
member of my team. Her background as a scholar, on the National Security Council, and
Assistant Secretary of State will serve our nation well at the United Nations. Susan knows that
the global challenges we face demand global institutions that work. She shares my belief that
the UN is an indispensable and imperfect forum. She will carry the message that our
commitment to multilateral action must be coupled with a commitment to reform. We need
the United Nations to be more effective as a venue for collective action -- against terror and
proliferation, climate change and genocide, poverty and disease.
Finally, I am convinced that General James Jones is uniquely suited to be a strong and skilled
National Security Advisor. Generations of Joneses have served heroically on the battlefield --
from the beaches of Tarawa in World War II, to Foxtrot Ridge in Vietnam. Jim's Silver Star is a
proud part of that legacy. He will bring to the job the dual experience of serving in uniform
and as a diplomat. He has commanded a platoon in battle, served as Supreme Allied
Commander in a time of war, and worked on behalf of peace in the Middle East. Jim is focused
on the threats of today and the future. He understands the connection between energy and
national security, and has worked on the frontlines of global instability – from Kosovo to
northern Iraq to Afghanistan. He will advise me and work effectively to integrate our efforts
across the government, so that we are effectively using all elements of American power to
defeat unconventional threats and promote our values.
I am confident that this team is what we need to make a new beginning for American national
security. This morning, we met to discuss the situation in Mumbai and some of the challenges
that we face in the months and years ahead. In the coming weeks, I will be in close contact
with these advisors, who will be working with their counterparts in the Bush Administration to
make sure that we are ready to hit the ground running on January 20th. Given the range of
threats that we face and the vulnerability that can be a part of every presidential transition, I
hope that we can proceed swiftly for those national security officials who demand
confirmation.
We move forward with the humility that comes with knowing that there are brave men and
women protecting us on our front lines: diplomats and intelligence officers in dangerous
corners of the world, troops serving their second, third, or fourth tours; FBI agents in the
field, cops on the beat, prosecutors in our courts, and cargo inspectors at our ports. These
selfless Americans whose names are unknown to most of us will form the backbone of our
effort. If we serve as well as they are serving, we will protect our country and promote our
values.
And as we move forward with respect for America's tradition of a bipartisan national security
policy and a commitment to national unity, we have to recall that when it comes to keeping
our nation and our people safe, we are not Republicans or Democrats: We are Americans.
There's no monopoly of power or wisdom in either party. Together, as one nation, as one
people, we can shape our times instead of being shaped by them. Together, we will meet the
challenges of the 21st century not with fear, but with hope.
Morning, everybody.
Last week, Vice President­Elect Biden and I began the process of announcing our economic 
team. Today, we are pleased to name another key member of this team: our nominee for 
Secretary of Commerce, my great friend, Governor Bill Richardson.  With each passing day, the work our team has begun, developing plans to revive our 
economy, becomes more urgent. Earlier this week, we learned that the U.S. economy has 
been in recession since December of 2007 and that our manufacturing output is at a 26 year 
low ­­ two stark reminders of the magnitude of the challenges we face. 
But while I know rebuilding our economy won’t be easy ­­ and it won’t be ­­ happen overnight
­­ I also know this: that right now, somewhere in America, a small business is at work with
the next big idea; a scientist is on the cusp of the next big breakthrough discovery; an
entrepreneur is sketching plans for the startup that will revolutionize an industry. Right now,  across America, the finest products in the world are rolling off our assembly lines. And the 
proudest, most determined, most productive workers in the world are on the job ­­ some, 
already on their second shift of the day; many, putting in longer hours than ever before.
After nearly two years of traveling across this country, meeting with workers, visiting 
businesses large and small, I am more confident than ever that we have everything we need 
to renew our economy. We've got the ingenuity, the technology, the skill, and commitment; 
we just need to put it to work.
It’s time to not just address the immediate economic threats, but to start laying the 
groundwork for long­term prosperity to help American businesses grow and thrive at home, 
and expand our efforts to promote American enterprise around the world.
This work is the core mission of the Secretary of Commerce. And with his breadth and depth
of experience in public life, Governor Richardson is uniquely suited for this role as a leading 
economic diplomat for America. During his time in state government and Congress, and in
tour ­­ two tours of duty in the cabinet, Bill has seen from just about every angle what makes 
our economy work and what keeps it from working better. 
As Governor of New Mexico, Bill showed how government can act as a partner to support our 
businesses, helping to create 80,000 new jobs. And under his leadership, New Mexico saw the 
lowest unemployment rate in decades. 
As a former Secretary of Energy, Bill understands the steps we must take to build a new,  clean­energy industry and create the green jobs of the twenty­first century ­­  jobs that pay 
well and won’t be outsourced; jobs that will help us end our dependence on foreign oil. 
And as a former Ambassador to the United Nations, Bill brings both international stature and a 
deep understanding of today’s global economy. He understands that the success of today’s 
business in Detroit or Columbus often depends on whether it can sell products in places like 
Santiago or Shanghai. And he knows that America’s reputation in the world is critical not just
to our security, but to our prosperity ­­ (excuse me) ­­ that when the citizens of the world 
respect America’s leadership, they are more likely to buy America’s products. 
To this crucial work of restoring America’s international standing, Bill will bring a leadership 
style all his own. Bill has never been content to just learn from briefing books, never satisfied 
with only the official version of the story. During his time in Congress, he held more than two
­­ 2,500 town­hall meetings, so he could hear directly from constituents. He was a regular in
the U.N. cafeteria, mixing it up with U.N. employees over lunch. And during his 2002
campaign for record ­­ for Governor, he actually broke a world record by shaking nearly 
14,000 hands in just eight hours. 
(I've got to check that statistic.) 
All of this reflects a determination to reach out and understand where people are coming 
from, what they hope for, and what he can do to help. This approach, I believe, has been the 
key to Bill’s success as a negotiator and will be key to his work on the critical functions of the 
Commerce Department ­­ from administering our census and monitoring our climate to
protecting our intellectual property and restoring our economic diplomacy. 
In the end, Bill Richardson is a leader who shares my values, and he must ­­ and he will be 
measured his progress the same way I do. Are we creating good jobs instead of losing them? 
Are incomes growing instead of shrinking? I know Bill will be an unyielding advocate for 
American business and American jobs at home and around the world. And I look forward to
working with him in the years ahead.
Let me begin by thanking George Mason University for their extraordinary hospitality and to
thank all the great friends, the governors, the mayors who are in attendance here today.
Throughout America's history, there have been some years that simply rolled into the next
without much notice or fanfare. And then there are the years that come along once in a
generation, the kind that mark a clean break from a troubled past and set a new course for
our nation. This is one of those years.
We start 2009 in the midst of a crisis unlike any we have seen in our lifetime, a crisis that has
only deepened over the last few weeks. Nearly two million jobs have been now lost. And on
Friday, we're likely to learn that we lost more jobs last year than at any time since World War
II. Just in the past year, another 2.8 million Americans who want and need full-time work
have had to settle for part-time jobs. Manufacturing has hit a 28-year low. Many businesses
cannot borrow or make payroll. Many families cannot pay their bills or their mortgage. Many
workers are watching their life savings disappear. And many, many Americans are both
anxious and uncertain of what the future will hold.
Now, I don't believe it's too late to change course, but it will be if we don't take dramatic
action as soon as possible. If nothing is done, this recession could linger for years. The
unemployment rate could reach double digits. Our economy could fall 1 trillion dollars short of
its full capacity, which translates into more than 12,000 dollars in lost income for a family of
four.
We could lose a generation of potential and promise as more young Americans are forced to
forego dreams of college or the chance to train for the jobs of the future. And our nation could
lose the competitive edge that has served as a foundation for our strength and our standing in
the world. In short, a bad situation could become dramatically worse.
This crisis did not happen solely by some accident of history or normal turn of the business
cycle. And we won't get out of it by simply waiting for a better day to come or relying on the
worn-out dogmas of the past. We arrived at this point due to an era of profound
irresponsibility that stretched from corporate board rooms to the halls of power in
Washington, D.C.
For years, too many Wall Street executives made imprudent and dangerous decisions, seeking
profits with too little regard for risk, too little regulatory scrutiny, and too little accountability.
Banks made loans without concern for whether borrowers could repay them, and some
borrowers took advantage of cheap credit to take on debt they couldn't afford. Politicians
spent taxpayer money without wisdom or discipline and too often focused on scoring political
points instead of problems they were sent here to solve. The result has been a devastating
loss of trust and confidence in our economy, our financial markets, and our government.
Now, the very fact that this crisis is largely of our own making means that it's not beyond our
ability to solve. Our problems are rooted in past mistakes, not our capacity for future
greatness. It will take time -- perhaps many years -- but we can rebuild that lost trust and
confidence. We can restore opportunity and prosperity. We should never forget that our
workers are still more productive than any on Earth. Our universities are still the envy of the
world. We are still home to the most brilliant minds, the most creative entrepreneurs, and the
most advanced technology and innovation that history has ever known. And we are still the
nation that has overcome great fears and improbable odds. If we act with the urgency and
seriousness that this moment requires, I know that we can do it again.
That is why I have moved quickly to work with my economic team and leaders of both parties
on an American Recovery and Reinvestment Plan that will immediately jump-start job creation
and long-term growth. It's a plan that represents not just new policy, but a whole new
approach to meeting our most urgent challenges. For if we hope to end this crisis, we must
end the culture of anything goes that helped create it, and this change must begin in
Washington. It's time to trade old habits for a new spirit of responsibility. It's time to finally
change the ways of Washington so that we can set a new and better course for America.
There is no doubt that the cost of this plan will be considerable. It will certainly add to the
budget deficit in the short term. But equally certain are the consequences of doing too little or
nothing at all, for that will lead to an even greater deficit of jobs, incomes, and confidence in
our economy.
It is true that we cannot depend on government alone to create jobs or long-term growth. But
at this particular moment, only government can provide the short-term boost necessary to lift
us from a recession this deep and severe. Only government can break the cycle that are [sic]
crippling our economy, where a lack of spending leads to lost jobs, which leads to even less
spending, where an inability to lend and borrow stops growth and leads to even less credit.
That's why we need to act boldly and act now to reverse these cycles. That's why we need to
put money in the pockets of the American people, create new jobs, and invest in our future.
That's why we need to restart the flow of credit and restore the rules of the road that will
ensure a crisis like this never happens again.
Now this plan begins with -- this plan must begin today, a plan I am confident will save or
create at least three million jobs over the next few years. It's not just another public works
program. It's a plan that recognizes both the paradox and promise of this moment: the fact
that there are millions of Americans trying to find work, even as all around the country there's
so much work to be done. And that's why we'll invest in priorities like energy and education,
health care and a new infrastructure that are necessary to keep us strong and competitive in
the 21st century. That's why the overwhelming majority of the jobs created will be in the
private sector, while our plan will save the public sector jobs of teachers, police officers,
firefighters, and others who provide vital services.
To finally spark the creation of a clean energy economy, we will double the production of
alternative energy in the next three years. We will modernize more than 75 percent of federal
buildings and improve the energy efficiency of 2 million American homes, saving consumers
and taxpayers billions on our energy bills.
In the process, we will put Americans to work in new jobs that pay well and can't be
outsourced, jobs building solar panels and wind turbines, constructing fuel-efficient cars and
buildings, and developing the new energy technologies that will lead to even more jobs, more
savings, and a cleaner, safer planet in the bargain.
To improve the quality of our health care while lowering its cost, we will make the immediate
investments necessary to ensure that, within five years, all of America's medical records are
computerized. This will cut waste, eliminate red tape and reduce the need to repeat expensive
medical tests. But it just won't save billions of dollars and thousands of jobs; it will save lives
by reducing the deadly but preventable medical errors that pervade our health care system.
To give our children the chance to live out their dreams in a world that's never been more
competitive, we will equip tens of thousands of schools, community colleges, and public
universities with 21st century classrooms, labs, and libraries. We'll provide new computers,
new technology, and new training for teachers so that students in Chicago and Boston can
compete with children in Beijing for the high-tech, high-wage jobs of the future.
To build an economy that can lead this future, we will begin to rebuild America. Yes, we'll put
people to work repairing crumbling roads, bridges, and schools by eliminating the backlog of
well-planned, worthy, and needed infrastructure projects. But we'll also do more to retrofit
America for a global economy. That means updating the way we get our electricity by starting
to build a new smart grid that will save us money, protect our power sources from blackout or
attack, and deliver clean, alternative forms of energy to every corner of our nation. It means
expanding broadband lines across America, so that a small business in a rural town can
connect and compete with their counterparts anywhere in the world. It means investing in the
science, research, and technology that will lead to new medical breakthroughs, new
discoveries, and entire new industries.
And finally, this recovery and reinvestment plan will provide immediate relief to states,
workers, and families who are bearing the brunt of this recession. To get people spending
again, 95% of working families will receive a thousand dollar tax cut -- the first stage of a
middle-class tax cut that I promised during the campaign and will include in our next budget.
To help Americans who have lost their jobs and can't find new ones, we'll continue the
bipartisan extension of unemployment insurance and health care coverage to help them
through this crisis. Government at every level will have to tighten its belt, but we'll help
struggling states avoid harmful budget cuts, as long as they take responsibility and use the
money to maintain essential services like police, fire, education, and health care.
Now I understand that some might be skeptical of this plan. Our government has already
spent a good deal of money, but we haven't yet seen that translate into more jobs or higher
incomes or renewed confidence in our economy. And that's why the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Plan won't just throw money at our problems; we'll invest in what works. The
true test of policies we'll pursue won't be whether they're Democratic or Republican ideas,
whether they're conservative or liberal ideas, but whether they create jobs, grow our
economy, and put the American Dream within the reach of the American people.
Instead of politicians doling out money behind a veil of secrecy, decisions about where we
invest will be made transparently, and informed by independent experts wherever possible.
Every American will be able to hold Washington accountable for these decisions by going
online to see how and where their taxpayer dollars are being spent. And as I announced
yesterday, we will launch an unprecedented effort to eliminate unwise and unnecessary
spending that has never been more unaffordable for our nation and our children's future than
it is right now.
We have to make tough choices and smart investments today so that as the economy
recovers, the deficits start coming down. We cannot have a solid recovery if our people and
our businesses don't have confidence that we're getting our fiscal house in order. And that's
why our goal is not to create a slew of new government programs, but a foundation for longterm
economic growth. That also means an economic recovery plan that is free from earmarks
and pet projects. I understand that every member of Congress has ideas about how to spend
money. Many of these projects are worthy. They benefit local communities.
But this emergency legislation must not be the vehicle for those aspirations. This must be a
time when leaders in both parties put the urgent needs of our nation above our own narrow
interests.
Now, this recovery plan alone will not solve all the problems that led us into this crisis. We
must also work with the same sense of urgency to stabilize and repair the financial system we
all depend on. That means using our full arsenal of tools to get credit flowing again to families
and businesses, while restoring confidence in our markets. It means launching a sweeping
effort to address the foreclosure crisis so that we can keep responsible families in their homes.
It means preventing the catastrophic failure of financial institutions whose collapse could
endanger the entire economy, but only with maximum protections for taxpayers and a clear
understanding that government support for any company is an extraordinary action that must
come with significant restrictions on the firms that receive support. And it means reforming a
weak and outdated regulatory system so that we can better withstand financial shocks and
better protect consumers, investors, and businesses from the reckless greed and risk-taking
that must never endanger our prosperity again.
No longer can we allow Wall Street wrongdoers to slip through regulatory cracks. No longer
can we allow special interests to put their thumbs on the economic scales. No longer can we
allow the unscrupulous lending and borrowing that leads only to destructive cycles of bubble
and bust. It is time to set a new course for this economy, and that change must begin now.
We should have an open and honest discussion about this recovery plan in the days ahead,
but I urge Congress to move as quickly as possible on behalf of the American people. For
every day we wait or point fingers or drag our feet, more Americans will lose their jobs. More
families will lose their savings. More dreams will be deferred and denied. And our nation will
sink deeper into a crisis that, at some point, we may not be able to reverse.
That is not the country I know. It is not a future I accept as President of the United States. A
world that depends on the strength of our economy is now watching and waiting for America
to lead once more. And that is what we will do.
It will not come easy or happen overnight, and it is altogether likely that things may get worse
before they get better. But that is all the more reason for Congress to act without delay. I
know the scale of this plan is unprecedented, but so is the severity of our situation. We have
already tried the wait-and-see approach to our problems, and it is the same approach that
helped lead us to this day of reckoning.
And that is why the time has come to build a 21st century economy in which hard work and
responsibility are once again rewarded. That's why I'm asking Congress to work with me and
my team day and night, on weekends if necessary, to get the plan passed in the next few
weeks.
That's why I'm calling on all Americans -- Democrats and Republicans and Independents -- to
put -- to put good ideas ahead of the old ideological battles; a sense of common purpose
above the same narrow partisanship; and insist that the first question each of us asks isn't,
"What's good for me?" but "What's good for the country my children will inherit?"
More than any program or policy, it is this spirit that will enable us to confront these
challenges with the same spirit that has led previous generations to face down war, and
depression, and fear itself. And if we do, if we are able to summon that spirit again, if we are
able to look out for one another, and listen to one another, and do our part for our nation and
for posterity, then I have no doubt that years from now, we will look back on 2009 as one of
those years that marked another new and hopeful beginning for the United States of America.
Thank you, God Bless You, and may God Bless America.
Hello America!
I want to thank all the speakers and performers today for reminding us, through song and 
through words, just what it is that we love about America. I want to thank all of you for 
braving the cold and the crowds and traveling in some cases thousands of miles to join us 
here today. Welcome to Washington, and welcome to this celebration of American renewal. 
In the course of our history, only a handful of generations have been asked to confront
challenges as serious as the ones we face right now. Our nation is at war. Our economy is in
crisis. Millions of Americans are losing their jobs and their homes. They're worried about how
they'll afford college for their kids or pay the stack of bills on their kitchen table. And most of 
all, they're anxious and uncertain about the future ­­ about whether this generation of 
Americans will be able to pass on what's best about this country to our children and their 
children. 
I won't pretend that meeting any one of these challenges will be easy. It will take more than a 
month or a year, and it will likely take many. Along the way there will be setbacks and false 
starts and days that test our resolve as a nation. 
But despite all this ­­ despite the enormity of the task that lies ahead ­­ I stand here today as 
hopeful as ever that the United States of America will endure, that it will prevail, that the 
dream of our Founders will live on in our time.
What gives me hope is what I see when I look out across this mall. For in these monuments 
are chiseled those unlikely stories that affirm our unyielding faith ­­ a faith that anything is 
possible in America. Rising before us stands a memorial to a man who led a small band of 
farmers and shopkeepers in revolution against the army of an empire, all for the sake of an
idea. 
On the ground below is a tribute to a generation that withstood war and depression ­­ men
and women like my grandparents who toiled on bomber assembly lines and marched across 
Europe to free the world from tyranny's grasp. Directly in front of us is a pool that still reflects 
the dream of a King, and the glory of a people who marched and bled so that their children
might be judged by their character's content. And behind me, watching over the union he 
saved, sits the man who in so many ways made this day possible.
And yet, as I stand here today, what gives me the greatest hope of all is not the stone and 
marble that surrounds us, but what fills the spaces in between. It is you ­­ Americans of every 
race and region and station who came here because you believe in what this country can be 
and because you want to help us get there. 
It's the same thing that gave me hope from the day we began this campaign for the 
presidency nearly two years ago: a belief that if we could just recognize ourselves in one 
another and bring everyone together ­­ Democrats, Republicans, Independents; Latino, Asian 
and Native American; black and white, gay and straight, disabled and then not only would we 
restore hope and opportunity in places that yearned for both, but maybe, just maybe, we 
might perfect our union in the process. 
This is what I believed, but you made this belief real. You proved once more that people who
love this country can change it. And as I prepare to assume the presidency, yours are the 
voices I will take with me every day when I walk into that Oval Office ­­ the voices of men and 
women who have different stories but hold common hopes; who ask only for what was 
promised us as Americans ­­ that we might make of our lives what we will and see our 
children climb higher than we did.
It is this thread that binds us together in common effort; that runs through every memorial on 
this mall; that connects us to all those who struggled and sacrificed and stood here before. It
is how this nation has overcome the greatest differences and the longest odds ­­ because 
there is no obstacle that can stand in the way of millions of voices calling for change. That is 
the belief with which we began this campaign, and that is how we will overcome what ails us 
now. 
There is no doubt that our road will be long, that our climb will be steep. But never forget that 
the true character of our nation is revealed not during times of comfort and ease, but by the 
right we do when the moment is hard. I ask you to help reveal that character once more, and 
together, we can carry forward as one nation, and one people, the legacy of our forefathers 
that we celebrate today. 
Thank you, America. God bless you.
Thank you, thank you.
My fellow citizens:
I stand here today humbled by the task before us, grateful for the trust you've bestowed,
mindful of the sacrifices borne by our ancestors. I thank President Bush for his service to our
nation, as well as the generosity and cooperation he has shown throughout this transition.
Forty-four Americans have now taken the presidential Oath. The words have been spoken
during rising tides of prosperity and the still waters of peace. Yet, every so often the Oath is
taken amidst gathering clouds and raging storms.
At these moments, America has carried on not simply because of the skill or vision of those in
high office, but because We the People have remained faithful to the ideals of our forebearers
[sic], and true to our founding documents.
So it has been. So it must be with this generation of Americans.
That we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood. Our nation is at war, against a farreaching
network of violence and hatred. Our economy is badly weakened, a consequence of
greed and irresponsibility on the part of some, but also our collective failure to make hard
choices and prepare the nation for a new age. Homes have been lost; jobs shed; businesses
shuttered. Our health care is too costly; our schools fail too many; and each day brings
further evidence that the ways we use energy strengthen our adversaries and threaten our
planet.
These are the indicators of crisis, subject to data and statistics. Less measurable, but no less
profound, is a sapping of confidence across our land -- a nagging fear that America's decline is
inevitable, that the next generation must lower its sights.
Today I say to you that the challenges we face are real. They are serious and they are many.
They will not be met easily or in a short span of time. But know this, America: They will be
met.
On this day, we gather because we have chosen hope over fear, unity of purpose over conflict
and discord.
On this day, we come to proclaim an end to the petty grievances and false promises, the
recriminations and worn out dogmas, that for far too long have strangled our politics.
We remain a young nation, but in the words of Scripture, the time has come to "set aside
childish things."2
 The time has come to reaffirm our enduring spirit; to choose our better
history; to carry forward that precious gift, that noble idea, passed on from generation to
generation: the God-given promise that all are equal, all are free, and all deserve a chance to
pursue their full measure of happiness.
In reaffirming the greatness of our nation, we understand that greatness is never a given. It
must be earned. Our journey has never been one of short-cuts or settling for less. It has not
been the path for the faint-hearted -- for those who prefer leisure over work, or seek only the
pleasures of riches and fame. Rather, it has been the risk-takers, the doers, the makers of
things -- some celebrated but more often men and women obscure in their labor, who have
carried us up the long, rugged path towards prosperity and freedom.
For us, they packed up their few worldly possessions and traveled across oceans in search of a
new life.
For us, they toiled in sweatshops and settled the West; endured the lash of the whip and
plowed the hard earth.
For us, they fought and died, in places like Concord and Gettysburg; Normandy and Khe Sahn.
Time and again these men and women struggled and sacrificed and worked till their hands
were raw so that we might live a better life. They saw America as bigger than the sum of our
individual ambitions; greater than all the differences of birth or wealth or faction.
This is the journey we continue today. We remain the most prosperous, powerful nation on
Earth. Our workers are no less productive than when this crisis began. Our minds are no less
inventive, our goods and services no less needed than they were last week or last month or
last year. Our capacity remains undiminished. But our time of standing pat, of protecting
narrow interests and putting off unpleasant decisions - that time has surely passed. Starting
today, we must pick ourselves up, dust ourselves off, and begin again the work of remaking
America.
For everywhere we look, there is work to be done. The state of our economy calls for action,
bold and swift, and we will act -- not only to create new jobs, but to lay a new foundation for
growth. We will build the roads and bridges, the electric grids and digital lines that feed our
commerce and bind us together. We will restore science to its rightful place, and wield
technology's wonders to raise health care's quality and lower its cost. We will harness the sun
and the winds and the soil to fuel our cars and run our factories. And we will transform our
schools and colleges and universities to meet the demands of a new age.
All this we can do.
All this we will do.
Now, there are some who question the scale of our ambitions -- who suggest that our system
cannot tolerate too many big plans. Their memories are short. For they have forgotten what
this country has already done; what free men and women can achieve when imagination is
joined to common purpose, and necessity to courage.
What the cynics fail to understand is that the ground has shifted beneath them -- that the
stale political arguments that have consumed us for so long no longer apply. The question we
ask today is not whether our government is too big or too small, but whether it works --
whether it helps families find jobs at a decent wage, care they can afford, a retirement that is
dignified. Where the answer is yes, we intend to move forward. Where the answer is no,
programs will end. And those of us who manage the public's dollars will be held to account --
to spend wisely, reform bad habits, and do our business in the light of day -- because only
then can we restore the vital trust between a people and their government.
Nor is the question before us whether the market is a force for good or ill. Its power to
generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched, but this crisis has reminded us that
without a watchful eye, the market can spin out of control. The nation cannot prosper long
when it favors only the prosperous. The success of our economy has always depended not just
on the size of our Gross Domestic Product, but on the reach of our prosperity; on the ability to
extend opportunity to every willing heart -- not out of charity, but because it is the surest
route to our common good.
As for our common defense, we reject as false the choice between our safety and our ideals.
Our Founding Fathers, faced with perils that we can scarcely imagine, drafted a charter to
assure the rule of law and the rights of man, a charter expanded by the blood of generations.
Those ideals still light the world, and we will not give them up for expedience'[s] sake. And so
to all the other peoples and governments who are watching today, from the grandest capitals
to the small village where my father was born: Know that America is a friend of each nation
and every man, woman, and child who seeks a future of peace and dignity. And we are ready
to lead once more.
Recall that earlier generations faced down fascism and communism not just with missiles and
tanks, but with the sturdy alliances and enduring convictions. They understood that our power
alone cannot protect us, nor does it entitle us to do as we please. Instead, they knew that our
power grows through its prudent use; our security emanates from the justness of our cause,
the force of our example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.
We are the keepers of this legacy. Guided by these principles once more, we can meet those
new threats that demand even greater effort -- even greater cooperation and understanding
between nations. We will begin to responsibly leave Iraq to its people, and forge a hardearned
peace in Afghanistan. With old friends and former foes, we will work tirelessly to
lessen the nuclear threat, and roll back the specter of a warming planet. We will not apologize
for our way of life, nor will we waver in its defense, and for those who seek to advance their
aims by inducing terror and slaughtering innocents, we say to you now that our spirit is
stronger and cannot be broken. You cannot outlast us, and we will defeat you!
For we know that our patchwork heritage is a strength, not a weakness. We are a nation of
Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus -- and non-believers. We are shaped by every
language and culture, drawn from every end of this Earth; and because we have tasted the
bitter swill of civil war and segregation, and emerged from that dark chapter stronger and
more united, we cannot help but believe that the old hatreds shall someday pass; that the
lines of tribe shall soon dissolve; that as the world grows smaller, our common humanity shall
reveal itself; and that America must play its role in ushering in a new era of peace.
To the Muslim world, we seek a new way forward, based on mutual interest and mutual
respect. To those leaders around the globe who seek to sow conflict, or blame their society's
ills on the West -- know that your people will judge you on what you can build, not what you
destroy.
To those who cling to power through corruption and deceit and the silencing of dissent, know
that you are on the wrong side of history; but that we will extend a hand if you are willing to
unclench your fist.
To the people of poor nations, we pledge to work alongside you to make your farms flourish
and let clean waters flow; to nourish starved bodies and feed hungry minds. And to those
nations like ours that enjoy relative plenty, we say we can no longer afford indifference to the
suffering outside our borders; nor can we consume the world's resources without regard to
effect. For the world has changed, and we must change with it.
As we consider the road that unfolds before us, we remember with humble gratitude those
brave Americans who, at this very hour, patrol far-off deserts and distant mountains. They
have something to tell us, just as the fallen heroes who lie in Arlington whisper through the
ages. We honor them not only because they are the guardians of our liberty, but because they
embody the spirit of service; a willingness to find meaning in something greater than
themselves. And yet, at this moment -- a moment that will define a generation -- it is
precisely this spirit that must inhabit us all.
For as much as government can do and must do, it is ultimately the faith and determination of
the American people upon which this nation relies. It is the kindness to take in a stranger
when the levees break, the selflessness of workers who would rather cut their hours than see
a friend lose their job which sees us through our darkest hours. It is the firefighter's courage
to storm a stairway filled with smoke, but also a parent's willingness to nurture a child, that
finally decides our fate.
Our challenges may be new. The instruments with which we meet them may be new. But
those values upon which our success depends -- honesty and hard work, courage and fair
play, tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and patriotism -- these things are old. These things are
true. They have been the quiet force of progress throughout our history. What is demanded
then is a return to these truths. What is required of us now is a new era of responsibility -- a
recognition, on the part of every American, that we have duties to ourselves, our nation, and
the world, duties that we do not grudgingly accept but rather seize gladly, firm in the
knowledge that there is nothing so satisfying to the spirit, so defining of our character, than
giving our all to a difficult task.
This is the price and the promise of citizenship.
This is the source of our confidence -- the knowledge that God calls on us to shape an
uncertain destiny.
This is the meaning of our liberty and our creed -- why men and women and children of every
race and every faith can join in celebration across this magnificent mall, and why a man
whose father less than sixty years ago might not have been served at a local restaurant can
now stand before you to take a most sacred Oath.
So let us mark this day with remembrance, of who we are and how far we have traveled. In
the year of America's birth, in the coldest of months, a small band of patriots huddled by
dying campfires on the shores of an icy river. The Capitol was abandoned. The enemy was
advancing. The snow was stained with blood. At a moment when the outcome of our
revolution was most in doubt, the father of our nation ordered these words be read to the
people:
Let it be told to the future world...that in the depth of winter, when nothing but hope
and virtue could survive...that the city and the country, alarmed at one common
danger, came forth to meet [it].
America: In the face of our common dangers, in this winter of our hardship, let us remember
these timeless words. With hope and virtue, let us brave once more the icy currents, and
endure what storms may come. Let it be said by our children's children that when we were
tested we refused to let this journey end, that we did not turn back nor did we falter; and with
eyes fixed on the horizon and God's grace upon us, we carried forth that great gift of freedom
and delivered it safely to future generations.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
We begin this year and this Administration in the midst of an unprecedented crisis that calls
for unprecedented action. Just this week, we saw more people file for unemployment than at
any time in the last twenty-six years, and experts agree that if nothing is done, the
unemployment rate could reach double digits. Our economy could fall $1 trillion short of its
full capacity, which translates into more than $12,000 in lost income for a family of four. And
we could lose a generation of potential, as more young Americans are forced to forgo college
dreams or the chance to train for the jobs of the future.
In short, if we do not act boldly and swiftly, a bad situation could become dramatically worse.
That is why I have proposed an American Recovery and Reinvestment Plan to immediately
jumpstart job creation as well as long-term economic growth. I am pleased to say that both
parties in Congress are already hard at work on this plan, and I hope to sign it into law in less
than a month.
It’s a plan that will save or create three to four million jobs over the next few years, and one
that recognizes both the paradox and the promise of this moment -- the fact that there are
millions of Americans trying to find work even as, all around the country, there’s so much
work to be done. That’s why this is not just a short-term program to boost employment. It’s
one that will invest in our most important priorities like energy and education; health care and
a new infrastructure that are necessary to keep us strong and competitive in the 21st century.
Today I’d like to talk specifically about the progress we expect to make in each of these areas.
To accelerate the creation of a clean energy economy, we will double our capacity to generate
alternative sources of energy like wind, solar, and biofuels over the next three years. We’ll
begin to build a new electricity grid that lay down more than 3,000 miles of transmission lines
to convey this new energy from coast to coast. We’ll save taxpayers $2 billion a year by
making 75% of federal buildings more energy efficient, and save the average working family
$350 on their energy bills by weatherizing 2.5 million homes.
To lower health care cost, cut medical errors, and improve care, we’ll computerize the nation’s
health record in five years, saving billions of dollars in health care costs and countless lives.
And we’ll protect health insurance for more than 8 million Americans who are in danger of
losing their coverage during this economic downturn.
To ensure our children can compete and succeed in this new economy, we’ll renovate and
modernize 10,000 schools, building state-of-the-art classrooms, libraries, and labs to improve
learning for over five million students. We’ll invest more in Pell Grants to make college
affordable for seven million more students, provide a $2,500 college tax credit to four million
students, and triple the number of fellowships in science to help spur the next generation of
innovation.
Finally, we will rebuild and retrofit America to meet the demands of the 21st century. That
means repairing and modernizing thousands of miles of America’s roadways and providing
new mass transit options for millions of Americans. It means protecting America by securing
90 major ports and creating a better communications network for local law enforcement and
public safety officials in the event of an emergency. And it means expanding broadband
access to millions of Americans, so business can compete on a level-playing field, wherever
they’re located.
I know that some are skeptical about the size and scale of this recovery plan. I understand
that skepticism, which is why this recovery plan must and will include unprecedented
measures that will allow the American people to hold my Administration accountable for these
results. We won’t just throw money at our problems -- we’ll invest in what works. Instead of
politicians doling out money behind a veil of secrecy, decisions about where we invest will be
made public, and informed by independent experts whenever possible. We’ll launch an
unprecedented effort to root out waste, inefficiency, and unnecessary spending in our
government, and every American will be able to see how and where we spend taxpayer
dollars by going to a new website called recovery.gov.
No one policy or program will solve the challenges we face right now, nor will this crisis recede
in a short period of time. But if we act now and act boldly; if we start rewarding hard work
and responsibility once more; if we act as citizens and not partisans and begin again the work
of remaking America, then I have faith that we will emerge from this trying time even
stronger and more prosperous than we were before.
Thanks for listening.
Thank you, Tim, for your hard work on this issue and on our economic recovery.
The economic crisis we face is unlike any we've seen in our lifetime. It's a crisis of falling
confidence and rising debt, of widely distributed risk and narrowly concentrated reward; a
crisis written in the fine print of sub-prime mortgages, on the ledger lines of once mighty
financial institutions, and on the pink slips that have upended the lives of so many people
across this country and cost the economy 2.6 million jobs last year alone.
We know that even if we do everything that we should, this crisis was years in the making,
and it will take more than weeks or months to turn things around.
But make no mistake: A failure to act, and act now, will turn crisis into a catastrophe and
guarantee a longer recession, a less robust recovery, and a more uncertain future. Millions
more jobs will be lost. More businesses will be shuttered. More dreams will be deferred.
And that's why I feel such a sense of urgency about the economic recovery and reinvestment
plan that is before Congress today. With it, we can save or create more than three million
jobs, doing things that will strengthen our country for years to come. It's not merely a
prescription for short-term spending -- it's a strategy for long-term economic growth in areas
like renewable energy and health care and education.
Now, in the past few days I've heard criticisms that this plan is somehow wanting, and these
criticisms echo the very same failed economic theories that led us into this crisis in the first
place -- the notion that tax cuts alone will solve all our problems; that we can ignore
fundamental challenges like energy independence and the high cost of health care; that we
can somehow deal with this in a piecemeal fashion and still expect our economy and our
country to thrive.
I reject those theories. And so did the American people when they went to the polls in
November and voted resoundingly for change. So I urge members of Congress to act without
delay. No plan is perfect, and we should work to make it stronger. No one is more committed
to making it stronger than me. But let's not make the perfect the enemy of the essential. Let's
show people all over the country who are looking for leadership in this difficult time that we
are equal to the task.
At the same time, we know that this recovery and reinvestment plan is only the first part of
what we need to do to restore prosperity and secure our future. We also need a strong and
viable financial system to keep credit flowing to businesses and families alike. And my
administration will do whatever it takes to restore our financial system. Our recovery depends
on it. And so in the next week, Secretary Geithner will release a new strategy to get credit
moving again -- a strategy that will reflect some of the lessons of past mistakes while laying
the foundation of the future.
But in order to restore trust in our financial system, we're going to have to do more than just
put forward our plans. In order to restore trust, we've got to make certain that taxpayer funds
are not subsidizing excessive compensation packages on Wall Street.
We all need to take responsibility. And this includes executives at major financial firms who
turned to the American people, hat in hand, when they were in trouble, even as they paid
themselves customary lavish bonuses. As I said last week, this is the height of irresponsibility.
It's shameful. And that's exactly the kind of disregard of the costs and consequences of their
actions that brought about this crisis: a culture of narrow self-interest and short-term gain at
the expense of everything else.
This is America. We don't disparage wealth. We don't begrudge anybody for achieving
success. And we certainly believe that success should be rewarded. But what gets people
upset -- and rightfully so -- are executives being rewarded for failure, especially when those
rewards are subsidized by U.S. taxpayers, many of whom are having a tough time
themselves.
For top executives to award themselves these kinds of compensation packages in the midst of
this economic crisis isn't just bad taste -- it's bad strategy -- and I will not tolerate it as
President. We're going to be demanding some restraint in exchange for federal aid -- so that
when firms seek new federal dollars, we won't find them up to the same old tricks.
As part of the reforms we're announcing today, top executives at firms receiving extraordinary
help from U.S. taxpayers will have their compensation capped at 500,000 dollars -- a fraction
of the salaries that have been reported recently. And if these executives receive any additional
compensation, it will come in the form of stock that can't be paid up until taxpayers are paid
back for their assistance.
Companies receiving federal aid are going to have to disclose publicly all the perks and
luxuries bestowed upon senior executives, and provide an explanation to the taxpayers and to
shareholders as to why these expenses are justified. And we're putting a stop to these kinds
of massive severance packages we've all read about with disgust; we're taking the air out of
golden parachutes.
We're asking these firms to take responsibility, to recognize the nature of this crisis and their
role in it. We believe that what we've laid out should be viewed as fair and embraced as basic
common sense.
And finally, these guidelines we're putting in place are only the beginning of a long-term
effort. We're going to examine the ways in which the means and manner of executive
compensation have contributed to a reckless culture and a quarter-by-quarter mentality that
in turn helped to wrought havoc in our financial system. We're going to be taking a look at
broader reforms so that executives are compensated for sound risk management, and
rewarded for growth measured over years, not just days or weeks.
We all have to pull together and take our share of responsibility. That's true here in
Washington. That's true on Wall Street. The American people are carrying a huge burden as a
result of this economic crisis: bearing the brunt of its effects as well as the cost of
extraordinary measures we're taking to address them. The American people expect and
demand that we pursue policies that reflect the reality of this crisis -- and that will prevent
these kinds of crises from occurring again in the future.
Thank you very much.
Good evening, everybody. Please be seated.
Before I take your questions tonight, I'd like to speak briefly about the state of our economy and why I
believe we need to put this recovery plan in motion as soon as possible.
I took a trip to Elkhart, Indiana, today. Elkhart is a place that has lost jobs faster than anywhere else in
America.
In one year, the unemployment rate went from 4.7 percent to 15.3 percent. Companies that have sustained
this community for years are shedding jobs at an alarming speed, and the people who've lost them have no
idea what to do or who to turn to. They can't pay their bill and they've stopped spending money. And
because they've stopped spending money, more businesses have been forced to lay off more workers. In
fact, local TV stations have started running public service announcements that tell people where to find food
banks, even as the food banks don't have enough to meet the demand.
As we speak, similar scenes are playing out in cities and towns across America. Last Monday, more than a
thousand men and women stood in line for 35 firefighter jobs in Miami. Last month, our economy lost
598,000 jobs, which is nearly the equivalent of losing every single job in the state of Maine. And if there's
anyone out there who still doesn't believe this constitutes a full-blown crisis, I suggest speaking to one of the
millions of Americans whose lives have been turned upside down because they don't know where their next
paycheck is coming from.
And that is why the single most important part of this Economic Recovery and Reinvestment Plan is the fact
that it will save or create up to 4 million jobs, because that's what America needs most right now.
It is absolutely true that we can't depend on government alone to create jobs or economic growth. That is
and must be the role of the private sector. But at this particular moment, with the private sector so
weakened by this recession, the federal government is the only entity left with the resources to jolt our
economy back into life. It is only government that can break the vicious cycle where lost jobs lead to people
spending less money, which leads to even more layoffs. And breaking that cycle is exactly what the plan
that's moving through Congress is designed to do.
When passed, this plan will ensure that Americans who've lost their jobs through no fault of their own can
receive greater unemployment benefits and continue their health care coverage. We will also provide a
$2,500 tax credit to folks who are struggling to pay the cost of their college tuition, and $1,000 worth of badly
needed tax relief to working and middle-class families. These steps will put more money in the pockets of
those Americans who are most likely to spend it, and that will help break the cycle and get our economy
moving.
But as we've learned very clearly and conclusively over the last eight years, tax cuts alone can't solve all of
our economic problems -- especially tax cuts that are targeted to the wealthiest few Americans.
We have tried that strategy, time and time again. And it's only helped lead us to the crisis we face right now.
And that's why we have come together, around a plan that combines hundreds of billions in tax cuts for the
middle class with direct investment in areas like health care, energy, education and infrastructure,
investments that will save jobs, create new jobs and new businesses and help our economy grow again,
now and in the future.
More than 90 percent of the jobs created by this plan will be in the private sector. They're not going to be
make-work jobs but jobs doing the work that America desperately needs done, jobs rebuilding our crumbling
roads and bridges, repairing our dangerously deficient dams and levees, so that we don't face another
Katrina.
They'll be jobs building the wind turbines and solar panels and fuel-efficient cars that will lower our
dependence on foreign oil and modernizing our costly health care system that will save us billions of dollars
and countless lives.
They'll be jobs creating the 21st-century classrooms, libraries and labs for millions of children across
America. And they'll be the jobs of firefighters and teachers and police officers that would otherwise be
eliminated, if we do not provide states with some relief.
Now after many weeks of debate and discussion, the plan that ultimately emerges from Congress must be
big enough and bold enough to meet the size of the economic challenges that we face right now. It's a plan
that is already supported by businesses representing almost every industry in America, by both the
Chamber of Commerce and the AFL-CIO. It contains input, ideas and compromises from both Democrats
and Republicans. It also contains an unprecedented level of transparency and accountability, so that every
American will be able to go online and see where and how we're spending every dime.
What it does not contain, however, is a single pet project, not a single earmark, and it has been stripped of
the projects members of both parties found most objectionable.
Now despite all of this, the plan's not perfect. No plan is. I can't tell you for sure that everything in this plan
will work exactly as we hope, but I can tell you with complete confidence that a failure to act will only deepen
this crisis, as well as the pain felt by millions of Americans.
My administration inherited a deficit of over $1 trillion, but because we also inherited the most profound
economic emergency since the Great Depression, doing little or nothing at all will result in ever -- even
greater deficits, even greater job loss, even greater loss of income and even greater loss of confidence.
Those are deficits that could turn a crisis into a catastrophe, and I refuse to let that happen. As long as I
hold this office, I will do whatever it takes to put this economy back on track and put this country back to
work.
I want to thank the members of Congress who've worked so hard to move this plan forward. But I also want
to urge all members of Congress to act without delay in the coming week to resolve their differences and
pass this plan.
We find ourselves in a rare moment where the citizens of our country and all countries are watching and
waiting for us to lead. It's a responsibility that this generation did not ask for, but one that we must accept for
the future of our children and our grandchildren.
The strongest democracies flourish from frequent and lively debate, but they endure when people of every
background and belief find a way to set aside smaller differences in service of a greater purpose. That's the
test facing the United States of America in this winter of our hardship, and it is our duty as leaders and
citizens to stay -- stay true to that purpose in the weeks and months ahead.
After a day of speaking with and listening to the fundamentally decent men and women who call this nation
home, I have full faith and confidence that we can do it.
But we're going to have to work together. That's what I intend to promote in the weeks and days ahead.
And with that, I'll take some of your questions. And let me go to Jennifer Loven at AP. There you are.
QUESTION: Thank you, Mr. President. Earlier today in Indiana you said something striking. You said that
this nation could end up in a crisis, without action, that we would be unable to reverse. Can you talk about
what you know or what you're hearing that would lead you to say that our recession might be permanent
when others in our history have not? And do you think that you risk losing some credibility or even talking
down the economy by using dire language like that?
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
No, no, no, no. I think that what I've said is what other economists have said across the
political spectrum, which is that if you delay acting on an economy of this severity, then you potentially
create a negative spiral that becomes much more difficult for us to get out of.
We saw this happen in Japan in the 1990s, where they did not act boldly and swiftly enough, and as a
consequence they suffered what was called the "lost decade," where essentially for the entire '90s, they did
not see any significant economic growth.
So what I'm trying to underscore is what the people in Elkhart already understand, that this is not your
ordinary, run-of-the-mill recession.
We are going through the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.
We've lost now 3.6 million jobs. But what's perhaps even more disturbing is that almost half of that job loss
has taken place over the last three months, which means that the problems are accelerating instead of
getting better.
Now, what I said in Elkhart today is what I'll repeat this evening, which is I'm absolutely confident that we
can solve this problem, but it's going to require us to take some significant, important steps.
Step number one, we have to pass an economic recovery and reinvestment plan. And we've made
progress. There was a vote this evening that moved the process forward in the Senate. We already have a
House bill that's passed. I'm hoping over the next several days that the House and the Senate can reconcile
their differences and get that bill on my desk.
There have been criticisms from a bunch of different directions about this bill. So let me just address a few
of them.
Some of the criticisms really are with the basic idea that government should intervene at all in this moment
of crisis. You have some people, very sincere, who philosophically just think the government has no
business interfering in the marketplace.
And in fact there are several who have suggested that FDR was wrong to intervene back in the New Deal.
They're fighting battles that I thought were resolved a pretty long time ago.
Most economists, almost unanimously, recognize that even if philosophically you're -- you're wary of
government intervening in the economy, when you have the kind of problem we have right now -- what
started on Wall Street goes to Main Street, suddenly businesses can't get credit, they start paring back their
investment, they start laying off workers, workers start pulling back in terms of spending -- that when you
have that situation, that government is an important element of introducing some additional demand into the
economy. We stand to lose about $1 trillion worth of demand this year and another trillion next year, and
what that means is you've got this gaping hole in the economy.
That's why the -- the figure that we initially came up with, of approximately $800 billion, was put forward.
That wasn't just some random number that I plucked out of -- out of a hat. That was Republican and
Democratic, conservative and liberal economists that I spoke to, who indicated that given the magnitude of
the crisis and the fact that it's happening worldwide, it's important for us to have a bill of sufficient size and
scope that we can save or create 4 million jobs. That still means that you're going to have some net job loss,
but at least we can start slowing the trend and moving it in the right direction.
Now, the recovery and reinvestment package is not the only thing we have to do. It's one leg of the stool.
We are still going to have to make sure that we are attracting private capital, get the credit markets flowing
again, because that's the lifeblood of the economy. And so tomorrow my Treasury secretary, Tim Geithner,
will be announcing some very clear and specific plans for how we are going to start loosening up credit once
again.
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
And that means having some transparency and oversight in the system.
It means that we correct some of the mistakes, with TARP, that were made earlier, the lack of consistency,
the lack of clarity, in terms of how the program was going to move forward.
It means that we condition taxpayer dollars that are being provided, to the banks, on them showing some
restraint when it comes to executive compensation, not using the money to charter corporate jets when
they're not necessary.
It means that we focus on housing and how are we going to help homeowners that are suffering foreclosure
or homeowners who are still making their mortgage payments but are seeing their property values decline.
So there's going to be a whole range of approaches that we have to take for dealing with the economy. My
bottom line is to make sure that we are saving or creating 4 million jobs, we are making sure that the
financial system is working again, that homeowners are getting some relief.
And I'm happy to get good ideas from across the political spectrum, from Democrats and Republicans.
What I won't do is return to the failed theories of the last eight years that got us into this fix in the first place,
because those theories have been tested and they have failed. And that's part of what the election in
November was all about. Okay?
I said during the campaign that Iran is a country that has extraordinary people, extraordinary
history and traditions, but that its actions over many years now have been unhelpful when it comes to
promoting peace and prosperity both in the region and around the world; that their attacks or -- or their --
their financing of terrorist organizations like Hezbollah and Hamas, the bellicose language that they've used
towards Israel, their development of a nuclear weapon or their pursuit of a nuclear weapon -- that all of
those things create the possibility of destabilizing the region and are not only contrary to our interests, but I
think are contrary to the interests of international peace.
What I've also said is that we should take an approach with Iran that employs all of the resources at the
United States' disposal, and that includes diplomacy. And so my national security team is currently
reviewing our existing Iran policy, looking at areas where we can have constructive dialogue, where we can
directly engage with them. And my expectation is, in the coming months, we will be looking for openings that
can be created where we can start sitting across the table, face to face; of diplomatic overtures that will
allow us to move our policy in a new direction.
There's been a lot of mistrust built up over the years, so it's not going to happen overnight.
And it's important that even as we engage in this direct diplomacy, we are very clear about certain deep
concerns that we have as a country, that Iran understands that we find the funding of terrorist organizations
unacceptable, that we're clear about the fact that a nuclear Iran could set off a nuclear arms race in the
region that would be profoundly destabilizing. So there are going to be a set of objectives that we have in
these conversations, but I think that there's the possibility, at least, of a relationship of mutual respect and
progress.
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
And I think that if you look at how we've approached the Middle East, my designation of George Mitchell as
a special envoy to help deal with the Arab-Israeli situation, some of the interviews that I've given, it indicates
the degree to which we want to do things differently in the region. Now it's time for Iran to send some signals
that it wants to act differently as well and recognize that even as it is has some rights as a member of the
international community, with those rights come responsibilities.
I don't think -- I don't think I underestimated it. I don't think the American people
underestimated it. They understand that there have been a lot of bad habits built up here in Washington.
And it's going to take time to break down some of those bad habits.
You know, when I made a series of overtures to the Republicans -- going over to meet with both Republican
caucuses, you know, putting three Republicans in my Cabinet, something that is unprecedented, making
sure that they were invited here to the White House, to talk about the economic recovery plan -- all those
were not designed simply to get some short-term votes. They were designed to try to build up some trust
over time.
And I think that, as I continue to make these overtures, over time, hopefully that will be reciprocated.
But understand the bottom line that I've got right now, which is what's happening to the people of Elkhart
and what's happening across the country. I can't afford to see Congress play the usual political games.
What we have to do right now is deliver for the American people. So my bottom line when it comes to the
recovery package is send me a bill that creates or saves 4 million jobs, because everybody has to be
possessed with a sense of urgency about putting people back to work, making sure that folks are staying in
their homes, that they can send their kids to college.
That doesn't negate the continuing efforts that I'm going to make to listen and engage with my Republican
colleagues. And hopefully the tone that I've taken, which has been consistently civil and respectful, will pay
some dividends over the long term.
There are going to be areas where we disagree and there are going to be areas where we agree.
As I said, the one concern I've got on the stimulus package, in terms of the debate and listening to some of
what's been said in Congress is that there seems to be a set of folks who -- I don't doubt their sincerity --
who just believe that we should do nothing. Now, if that's their opening position or their closing position in
negotiations, then we're probably not going to make much progress, because I don't think that's
economically sound and I don't think what -- that's what the American people expect, is for us to stand by
and do nothing.
There are others who recognize that we've got to do a significant recovery package but they're concerned
about the mix of what's in there. And if they're sincere about it, then I'm happy to have conversations about
this tax cut versus that -- that tax cut or this infrastructure project versus that infrastructure project.
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
But what I -- what I've been concerned about is some of the language that's been used suggesting that this
is full of pork and this is wasteful government spending, so on and so forth. First of all, when I hear that from
folks who presided over a doubling of the national debt, then, you know, I just want them to not engage in
some revisionist history. I inherited the deficit that we have right now and the economic crisis that we have
right now.
Number two is that, although there are some programs in there that I think are good policy, some of them
aren't job creators. I think it's perfectly legitimate to say that those programs should be out of this particular
recovery package, and we can deal with them later.
But when they start characterizing this as pork without acknowledging that there are no earmarks in this
package -- something, again, that was pretty rare over the last eight years -- then you get a feeling that
maybe we're playing politics instead of actually trying to solve problems for the American people.
So I'm going to keep on engaging. I hope that as we get the Senate and the House bills together, that
everybody is willing to give a little bit. I suspect that the package that emerges is not going to be a hundred
percent of what I want. But my bottom line is, are we creating 4 million jobs, and are we laying the
foundation for long- term economic growth?
This is another concern that I've had in some of the arguments that I'm hearing. When people suggest that
what a waste of money to make federal buildings more energy-efficient -- why would that be a waste of
money? We're creating jobs immediately by retrofitting these buildings or weatherizing 2 million Americans'
homes, as was called for in the package. So that right there creates economic stimulus, and we are saving
taxpayers, when it comes to federal buildings, potentially $2 billion. In the case of homeowners, they will see
more money in their pockets. And we're reducing our dependence on foreign oil in the Middle East. Why
wouldn't we want to make that kind of investment?
Now, maybe philosophically you just don't think that the federal government should be involved in energy
policy. I happen to disagree with that. I think that's the reason why we find ourselves importing more foreign
oil right now than we did back in the early '70s, when OPEC first formed. And we can have a respectful
debate about whether or not we should be involved in energy policymaking, but don't suggest that somehow
that's wasteful spending. That's exactly what this country needs.
The same applies when it comes to information technologies and health care. We know that health care is
crippling businesses and making us less competitive, as well as breaking the banks of families all across
America. And part of the reason is we've got the most inefficient health care system imaginable. We're still
using paper. We're -- we're still filing things in triplicate. Nurses can't read the prescriptions that doctors --
that doctors have written out. Why wouldn't we want to put that on an -- put that on an electronic medical
record that will reduce error rates, reduce our long-term cost of health care, and create jobs right now?
Education, yet another example. The suggestion is, why should the federal government be involved in
school construction? Well, I visited a school down in South Carolina that was built in the 1850s. Kids are still
learning in that school -- as best they can. When the -- when the railroad -- when the -- it's right next to a
railroad, and when the train runs by the whole building shakes and the teacher has to stop teaching for a
while.
The -- The auditorium is completely broken down and they can't use it. So why wouldn't we want to build
state-of-the-art schools with science labs that are teaching our kids the skills they need for the 21st century,
that will enhance our economy and, by the way, right now will create jobs?
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
So, you know, we can differ on some of the particulars, but again, the question I think that the American
people are asking is, do you just want government to do nothing, or do you want it to do something? If you
want it to do something, then we can have a conversation. But doing nothing -- that's not an option from my
perspective.
Well, first of all, I don't think it's accurate to say that consumer spending got us into this mess.
What got us into this mess initially were banks taking exorbitant, wild risks with other people's monies,
based on shaky assets. And because of the enormous leverage, where they had $1 worth of assets and
they were betting $30 on that $1, what we had was a crisis in the financial system.
That led to a contraction of credit, which in turn meant businesses couldn't make payroll or make
inventories, which meant that everybody became uncertain about the future of the economy.
So people started making decisions accordingly, reducing investments, initiating layoffs, which in turn made
things worse.
Now, you are making a legitimate point, Chuck, about the fact that our savings rate has declined. And this
economy has been driven by consumer spending for a very long time. And that's not going to be
sustainable. You know, if all we're doing is spending and we're not making things, then over time, other
countries are going to get tired of lending us money. And eventually the party's going to be over.
Well, in fact, the party now is over. And so the sequence of how we're approaching this is as follows. Our
immediate job is to stop the downward spiral. And that means putting money into consumers' pockets. It
means loosening up credit.
It means putting forward investments that not only employ people immediately but also lay the groundwork
for long-term economic growth. And that by the way is important, even if you're a fiscal conservative,
because the biggest problem we're going to have, with our federal budget, is if we continue a situation in
which there are no tax revenues, because economic growth is plummeting at the same time as we've got
more demands for unemployment insurance; we've got more demands for people who've lost their health
care, more demand for food stamps. That will put enormous strains on the federal budget as well as the
state budget.
So the most important thing we can do for our budget crisis right now is to make sure that the economy
doesn't continue to tank. And that's why passing the Economic Recovery Plan is the right thing to do, even
though I recognize that it's expensive.
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
Look, I would love not to have to spend money right now. I'd -- you know, this notion that somehow I came
in here just ginned up to spend $800 billion, you know, that -- that wasn't -- that wasn't how I envisioned my
presidency beginning. But we have to adapt to existing circumstances.
Now, what we are going to also have to do is to make sure that as soon as the economy stabilizes,
investment begins again; we're no longer contracting, but we're growing; that our midterm and long-term
budget is dealt with. And I think the same is true for individual consumers. Right now, they're just -- they're
just trying to figure out how do I make sure that if I lose my job, you know, I'm still going to be able to make
my mortgage payments.
Or they're worried about, how am I going to pay next month's bills? So they're not engaging in a lot of longterm
financial planning.
Once the economy stabilizes and people are less fearful, then I do think that we're going to have to start
thinking about how do we operate more prudently, because there's no such thing as a free lunch. So if -- if
you want to get -- if you want to buy a house, then putting zero down and buying a house that is probably
not affordable for you in case something goes wrong, that's something that has to be reconsidered.
So we're going to have to change our -- our bad habits. But right now, the key is making sure that we pull
ourselves out of the economic slump that we're in.
All right. Julianna Goldman, Bloomberg.
Well, the credit crisis is real. And it's not over. I mean, we averted catastrophe by passing the
TARP legislation. But as I said before, because of a lack of clarity and consistency in how it was applied, a
lack of oversight in -- in -- in how the money went out, we didn't get as a big of a bang for the buck as we
should have.
My immediate task is making sure that the second half of that money, $350 billion, is spent properly. That's
my first job. Before I even think about what else I've got to do, my first task is to make sure that my secretary
of the Treasury, Tim Geithner, working with Larry Summers, my national economic adviser, and others, are
coming up with the best possible plan to use this money wisely, in a way that's transparent, in a way that
provides clear oversight; that we are conditioning any money that we give to banks on them reducing
executive compensation to reasonable levels and to make sure that they're not wasting that money.
We are going to have to work with the banks in an effective way to clean up their balance sheets so that
some trust is restored within the marketplace, because right now part of the problem is that nobody really
knows what's on the banks' books. Any given bank, they're not sure what kinds of losses are there. We've
got to open things up and restore some trust.
We also have to deal with the housing issue in a clear and consistent way.
I don't want to preempt my secretary of the Treasury; he's going to be laying out these principles in great
detail tomorrow. But my instruction to him has been let's get this right, let's create a template in which we're
restoring market confidence. And the reason that's so important is because we don't know yet whether we're
going to need additional money or how much additional money we'll need until we've seen how successful
we are at restoring a sense of confidence in a marketplace that the federal government and the Federal
Reserve Bank and the FDIC, working in concert, know what they're doing.
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
That can make a big difference, in terms of whether or not we attract private capital back into the
marketplace. And ultimately the government cannot substitute for all the private capital that has been
withdrawn from the system. We've got to restore confidence, so that private capital goes back in.
Okay.
Jake.
I think my initial measure of success is creating or saving 4 million jobs. That's bottom line
number one, because if people are working, then they've got enough confidence to make purchases, to
make investments. Businesses start seeing that consumers are out there with a little more confidence. And
they start making investments, which means they start hiring workers.
So step number one, job creation.
Step number two, are we seeing the credit markets operate effectively? You know, I can't tell you how many
businesses that I talk to that are successful businesses but just can't get credit. Part of the problem in
Elkhart that I heard about today was the fact that this is the RV capital of America. You've got a bunch of RV
companies that have customers who want to purchase RVs, but even though their credit is good, they can't
get the loan.
Now, the businesses also can't get loans to make payments to their suppliers. But when they have
consumers, consumers can't get the loans that they need. So normalizing the credit markets is, I think, step
number two.
Step number three is going to be housing. Have we stabilized the housing market? Now, you know, the
federal government doesn't have complete control over that. But if our plan is effective, working with the
Federal Reserve Bank, working with the FDIC, I think what we can do is stem the rate of foreclosure and we
can start stabilizing housing values over time.
And the most -- the biggest measure of success is whether we stop contracting and shedding jobs, and we
start growing again. Now, you know, I don't have a crystal ball, and as I said, this is an unprecedented crisis.
But my hope is that after a difficult year -- and this year is going to be a difficult year -- that businesses start
investing again, they start making decisions that, you know, in fact, there's money to be made out there;
customers -- or consumers start feeling that their jobs are stable and safe, and they start making purchases
again. And if we get things right then, starting next year, we can start seeing some significant improvement.
Ed Henry. Where's Ed? CNN. There he is.
Your question is timely. We got reports that four American service members have been killed
in Iraq today. And you know, obviously our thoughts and prayers go out to the families.
I've said before that, you know, people have asked me, "When did it hit you that you are now president?"
And what I told them was the most sobering moment is signing letters to the families of our fallen heroes. It
reminds you of the responsibilities that you carry in this office and the consequences of decisions that you
make.
Now with respect to the policy of opening up media to loved ones being brought back home, we are in the
process of reviewing those policies in conversations with the Department of Defense. So I don't want to give
you an answer now, before I've evaluated that review and understand all the implications involved.
With respect to Afghanistan, this is going to be a big challenge. I think, because of the extraordinary work
done by our troops and some very good diplomatic work done by Ambassador Crocker in Iraq, we just saw
an election in Iraq that went relatively peacefully, and you get a sense that the political system is now
functioning in a meaningful way.
You do not see that yet in Afghanistan. They've got elections coming up, but effectively the national
government seems very detached from what's going on in the surrounding community. In addition, you've
got the Taliban and al Qaeda operating in the FATA and these border regions between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. And what we haven't seen is the kind of concerted effort to root out those safe havens that would
ultimately make our mission successful.
So we are undergoing a thorough-going review. Not only is General Petraeus, now the head of CENTCOM,
conducting his own review, he's now working in concert with the special envoy that I've sent over -- Richard
Holbrooke, one of our top diplomats -- to evaluate a regional approach. We are going to need more effective
coordination of our military efforts with diplomatic efforts with development efforts with more effective
coordination with our allies in order for us to be successful.
The bottom line, though -- and I just want to remember the American people, because this is going to be
difficult -- is this is a situation in which a region served as the base to launch an attack that killed 3,000
Americans. And this past week I met with families of those who were lost in 9/11, a reminder of the costs of
allowing those safe havens to exist.
My bottom line is that we cannot allow al Qaeda to operate. We cannot have those safe havens in that
region. And we're going to have to work both smartly and effectively, but with consistency, in order to make
sure that those safe havens don't exist.
I do not have yet a timetable for how long that's going to take. What I know is I'm not going to make -- I'm
not going to allow al Qaeda or bin Laden to operate with impunity planning attacks on the U.S. homeland.
All right.
Again, Helene, I -- I -- and I'm trying to avoid preempting my secretary of the Treasury; I want
all of you to show up at his press conference as well. (Laughter.) He's going to be terrific.
But this relates to Jake's earlier question. One of my bottom lines is whether or not credit is flowing to the
people who need it. Is it flowing to banks? Is -- excuse me; is it flowing to businesses, large and small? Is it
flowing to consumers? Are they able to operate in ways that translate into jobs and economic growth on
Main Street?
And the package that we've put together is designed to help do that. And beyond that, I'm going to make
sure that Tim gets his moment in the sun tomorrow, all right?
(Laughs.) You know, I don't remember exactly what Joe was referring to, not surprisingly.
(Laughter.) But let me try this out.
I think what Joe may have been suggesting, although I wouldn't put numerical -- I would ascribe any
numerical percentage to any of this, is that given the magnitude of the challenges that we have, any single
thing that we do is going to be part of the solution, not all of the solution.
And as I said in my introductory remarks, not everything we do is going to work out exactly as we intended it
to work out. This is an unprecedented problem. And you know, when you talk to economists, there's some
general sense of how we're going to move forward.
There's some strong consensus about the need for a recovery package of a certain magnitude. There's a
strong consensus that you shouldn't put all your eggs in one basket, all tax cuts or all investment, but that
there should be a range of approaches.
But even if we do everything right on that, we've still got to deal with what we just talked about, the financial
system and making sure that banks are lending again. We're still going to have to deal with housing. We're
still going to have to make sure that we've got a regulatory structure -- a regulatory architecture for the
financial system that prevents crises like this from occurring again. Those are all big, complicated tasks.
So I don't know whether Joe was referring to that, but I use that as a launching point to make a general
point about these issues.
Yeah, I think it's depressing news on top of what's been a flurry of depressing items, when it
comes to Major League Baseball.
And if you're a fan of Major League Baseball, I think it -- it tarnishes an entire era, to some degree. And it's
unfortunate, because I think there are a lot of ballplayers who played it straight.
The latest on President Obama, the new administration and other news from Washington and around the
nation.
And you know, the thing I'm probably most concerned about the message that it sends to our kids.
What I'm pleased about is, Major League Baseball seems to finally be taking this seriously, to recognize
how big of a problem this is for the sport, and that our kids hopefully are watching and saying: You know
what? There are no shortcuts; that when you try to take shortcuts, you may end up tarnishing your entire
career, and that your integrity's not worth it. That's the message I hope is communicated.
All right. Helen. This is my inaugural moment here. (Laughter.) I'm really excited.
Well, I think that Pakistan -- there is no doubt that in the FATA region of Pakistan, in the
mountainous regions along the border of Afghanistan, that there are safe havens where terrorists are
operating.
And one of the goals of Ambassador Holbrooke as he is traveling throughout the region is to deliver a
message to Pakistan that they are endangered as much as we are by the continuation of those operations,
and that we've got to work in a regional fashion to root out those safe havens.
They're -- it's not acceptable for Pakistan or for us to have folks who, with impunity, will kill innocent men,
women and children.
And you know, I -- I believe that the new government of Pakistan and -- and Mr. Zardari cares deeply about
getting control of this situation, and we want to be effective partners with them on that issue.
Well, Mr. Holbrooke is there, and that's exactly why he's being sent there, because I think that
we have to make sure that Pakistan is a stalwart ally with us in battling this terrorist threat.
With respect to nuclear weapons, you know, I don't want to speculate. What I know is this: that if we see a
nuclear arms race in a region as volatile as the Middle East, everybody will be in danger.
And one of my goals is to prevent nuclear proliferation generally.
I think that it's important for the United States, in concert with Russia, to lead the way on this. And you know,
I've mentioned this in conversations with the Russian president, Mr. Medvedev, to let him know that it is
important for us to restart the conversation, about how we can start reducing our nuclear arsenals in an
effective way, so that --
so that we then have the standing to go to other countries and start stitching back together
the non- proliferation treaties that frankly have been weakened over the last several years.
Thank you. Pease, be seated. Thank you, very much.
Madam Speaker, Leader Reid, members of Congress, dear friends, former colleagues:
It is a great honor to be here -- a place where Lincoln served, was inaugurated, and where the
nation he saved bid him a last farewell. As we mark the bicentennial of our 16th President's
birth, I cannot claim to know as much about his life and works as many who are also speaking
today, but I can say that I feel a special gratitude to this singular figure who in so many ways
made my own story possible -- and in so many ways made America's story possible.
It is fitting that we are holding this celebration here at the Capitol, for the life of this building
is bound ever so closely to the times of this immortal President. Built by artisans and
craftsmen, but also immigrants and slaves, it was here, in the rotunda, that Union soldiers
received help from a makeshift hospital; it was downstairs, in the basement, that they were
baked bread to give them strength; and it was in the Senate and House chambers where they
slept at night and spent some of their days.
What those soldiers saw when they looked on this building was a very different sight than the
one we see today, for it remained unfinished until the end of the war. The laborers who built
the dome came to work wondering each day whether that would be their last; whether the
metal they were using for its frame would be requisitioned for the war and melted down into
bullets. But each day went by without any orders to halt construction, and so they kept on
working, and kept on building.
And when President Lincoln was finally told of all the metal being used here, his response was
short and clear: That is as it should be. The American people needed to be reminded, he
believed, that even in a time of war, the work would go on; the people's business would
continue; that even when the nation itself was in doubt, its future was being secured; and
that on that distant day, when the guns fell silent, a national capitol would stand, with a
statue of freedom at its peak, as a symbol of unity in a land still mending its divisions.
It is this sense of unity, this ability to plan for a shared future even at a moment where our
nation was torn apart, that I reflect on today. And while there are any number of moments
that reveal that particular side of this extraordinary man, Abraham Lincoln -- that particular
aspect of his leadership -- there's one that I'd like to share with you today.
In the war's final weeks, aboard Grant's flagship, The River Queen, President Lincoln was
asked what was to be done with the rebel armies once General Lee surrendered. With victory
at hand, Lincoln could have sought revenge. He could have forced the South to pay a steep
price for their rebellion. But despite all the bloodshed and all the misery that each side had
exacted upon the other, and despite his absolute certainty in the rightness of the cause of
ending slavery, no Confederate soldier was to be punished, Lincoln ordered. They were to be
treated, as he put it, "liberally all round." What Lincoln wanted was for Confederate troops to
go back home and return to work on their farms and in their shops. He was even willing, he
said, to "let them have their horses to plow and their guns to shoot crows with."
That was the only way, Lincoln knew, to repair the rifts that had torn this country apart. It
was the only way to begin the healing that our nation so desperately needed. What Lincoln
never forgot, not even in the midst of civil war, was that despite all that divides us -- north
and south, black and white -- we were, at heart, one nation and one people, sharing a bond
as Americans that could bend but would not break.
And so even as we meet here today, in a moment when we are far less divided than in
Lincoln's day, but when we are once again debating the critical issues of our time -- and
debating them sometimes fiercely -- let us remember that we are doing so as servants of the
same flag, as representatives of the same people, and as stakeholders in a common future.
That is the most fitting tribute we can pay -- the most lasting monument we can build -- to
that most remarkable of men, Abraham Lincoln.
Thank you.
Madame Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, and the First Lady of the United States:
I’ve come here tonight not only to address the distinguished men and women in this great chamber, but to
speak frankly and directly to the men and women who sent us here.
I know that for many Americans watching right now, the state of our economy is a concern that rises above
all others. And rightly so. If you haven’t been personally affected by this recession, you probably know
someone who has ­­ a friend; a neighbor; a member of your family. You don’t need to hear another list of
statistics to know that our economy is in crisis, because you live it every day. It’s the worry you wake up
with and the source of sleepless nights. It’s the job you thought you’d retire from but now have lost; the
business you built your dreams upon that’s now hanging by a thread; the college acceptance letter your 
child had to put back in the envelope. The impact of this recession is real, and it is everywhere.
But while our economy may be weakened and our confidence shaken; though we are living through difficult
and uncertain times, tonight I want every American to know this:
We will rebuild, we will recover, and the United States of America will emerge stronger than before.
The weight of this crisis will not determine the destiny of this nation. The answers to our problems don’t lie
beyond our reach. They exist in our laboratories and universities; in our fields and our factories; in the
imaginations of our entrepreneurs and the pride of the hardest­working people on Earth. Those qualities 
that have made America the greatest force of progress and prosperity in human history we still possess in
ample measure. What is required now is for this country to pull together, confront boldly the challenges we
face, and take responsibility for our future once more.
Now, if we’re honest with ourselves, we’ll admit that for too long, we have not always met these
responsibilities ­­ as a government or as a people. I say this not to lay blame or look backwards, but
because it is only by understanding how we arrived at this moment that we’ll be able to lift ourselves out of
this predicament.
The fact is, our economy did not fall into decline overnight. Nor did all of our problems begin when the
housing market collapsed or the stock market sank. We have known for decades that our survival depends 
on finding new sources of energy. Yet we import more oil today than ever before. The cost of health care
eats up more and more of our savings each year, yet we keep delaying reform. Our children will compete
for jobs in a global economy that too many of our schools do not prepare them for. And though all these
challenges went unsolved, we still managed to spend more money and pile up more debt, both as 
individuals and through our government, than ever before.
In other words, we have lived through an era where too often, short­term gains were prized over long­term 
prosperity; where we failed to look beyond the next payment, the next quarter, or the next election. A 
surplus became an excuse to transfer wealth to the wealthy instead of an opportunity to invest in our future. Regulations were gutted for the sake of a quick profit at the expense of a healthy market. People bought
homes they knew they couldn’t afford from banks and lenders who pushed those bad loans anyway. And all
the while, critical debates and difficult decisions were put off for some other time on some other day. Well that day of reckoning has arrived, and the time to take charge of our future is here.
Now is the time to act boldly and wisely ­­ to not only revive this economy, but to build a new foundation for 
lasting prosperity. Now is the time to jumpstart job creation, re­start lending, and invest in areas like energy,
health care, and education that will grow our economy, even as we make hard choices to bring our deficit
down. That is what my economic agenda is designed to do, and that’s what I’d like to talk to you about
tonight.
It’s an agenda that begins with jobs.
As soon as I took office, I asked this Congress to send me a recovery plan by President’s Day that would
put people back to work and put money in their pockets. Not because I believe in bigger government – I
don’t. Not because I’m not mindful of the massive debt we’ve inherited – I am. I called for action because
the failure to do so would have cost more jobs and caused more hardships. In fact, a failure to act would
have worsened our long­term deficit by assuring weak economic growth for years. That’s why I pushed for 
quick action. And tonight, I am grateful that this Congress delivered, and pleased to say that the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act is now law.
Over the next two years, this plan will save or create 3.5 million jobs. More than 90% of these jobs will be in
the private sector – jobs rebuilding our roads and bridges; constructing wind turbines and solar panels;
laying broadband and expanding mass transit.
Because of this plan, there are teachers who can now keep their jobs and educate our kids. Health care
professionals can continue caring for our sick. There are 57 police officers who are still on the streets of
Minneapolis tonight because this plan prevented the layoffs their department was about to make.
Because of this plan, 95% of the working households in America will receive a tax cut ­­ a tax cut that you
will see in your paychecks beginning on April 1st.
Because of this plan, families who are struggling to pay tuition costs will receive a $2,500 tax credit for all
four years of college. And Americans who have lost their jobs in this recession will be able to receive
extended unemployment benefits and continued health care coverage to help them weather this storm.
I know there are some in this chamber and watching at home who are skeptical of whether this plan will
work. I understand that skepticism. Here in Washington, we’ve all seen how quickly good intentions can
turn into broken promises and wasteful spending. And with a plan of this scale comes enormous 
responsibility to get it right.
That is why I have asked Vice President Biden to lead a tough, unprecedented oversight effort – because
nobody messes with Joe. I have told each member of my Cabinet as well as mayors and governors across 
the country that they will be held accountable by me and the American people for every dollar they spend. I
have appointed a proven and aggressive Inspector General to ferret out any and all cases of waste and
fraud. And we have created a new website called recovery.gov so that every American can find out how
and where their money is being spent.
So the recovery plan we passed is the first step in getting our economy back on track. But it is just the first
step. Because even if we manage this plan flawlessly, there will be no real recovery unless we clean up the
credit crisis that has severely weakened our financial system.
I want to speak plainly and candidly about this issue tonight, because every American should know that it
directly affects you and your family’s well­being. You should also know that the money you’ve deposited in
banks across the country is safe; your insurance is secure; and you can rely on the continued operation of
our financial system. That is not the source of concern.
The concern is that if we do not re­start lending in this country, our recovery will be choked off before it even
begins.
You see, the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy. The ability to get a loan is how you finance the
purchase of everything from a home to a car to a college education; how stores stock their shelves, farms 
buy equipment, and businesses make payroll.
But credit has stopped flowing the way it should. Too many bad loans from the housing crisis have made
their way onto the books of too many banks. With so much debt and so little confidence, these banks are
now fearful of lending out any more money to households, to businesses, or to each other. When there is 
no lending, families can’t afford to buy homes or cars. So businesses are forced to make layoffs. Our 
economy suffers even more, and credit dries up even further.
That is why this administration is moving swiftly and aggressively to break this destructive cycle, restore
confidence, and re­start lending.
We will do so in several ways. First, we are creating a new lending fund that represents the largest effort
ever to help provide auto loans, college loans, and small business loans to the consumers and
entrepreneurs who keep this economy running.
Second, we have launched a housing plan that will help responsible families facing the threat of foreclosure
lower their monthly payments and re­finance their mortgages. It’s a plan that won’t help speculators or that
neighbor down the street who bought a house he could never hope to afford, but it will help millions of
Americans who are struggling with declining home values – Americans who will now be able to take
advantage of the lower interest rates that this plan has already helped bring about. In fact, the average
family who re­finances today can save nearly $2000 per year on their mortgage.
Third, we will act with the full force of the federal government to ensure that the major banks that Americans 
depend on have enough confidence and enough money to lend even in more difficult times. And when we
learn that a major bank has serious problems, we will hold accountable those responsible, force the
necessary adjustments, provide the support to clean up their balance sheets, and assure the continuity of a
strong, viable institution that can serve our people and our economy.
I understand that on any given day, Wall Street may be more comforted by an approach that gives banks 
bailouts with no strings attached, and that holds nobody accountable for their reckless decisions. But such
an approach won’t solve the problem. And our goal is to quicken the day when we re­start lending to the
American people and American business and end this crisis once and for all.
I intend to hold these banks fully accountable for the assistance they receive, and this time, they will have to
clearly demonstrate how taxpayer dollars result in more lending for the American taxpayer. This time, CEOs 
won’t be able to use taxpayer money to pad their paychecks or buy fancy drapes or disappear on a private
jet. Those days are over.
Still, this plan will require significant resources from the federal government – and yes, probably more than
we’ve already set aside. But while the cost of action will be great, I can assure you that the cost of inaction
will be far greater, for it could result in an economy that sputters along for not months or years, but perhaps 
a decade. That would be worse for our deficit, worse for business, worse for you, and worse for the next
generation. And I refuse to let that happen.
I understand that when the last administration asked this Congress to provide assistance for struggling
banks, Democrats and Republicans alike were infuriated by the mismanagement and results that followed. So were the American taxpayers. So was I.
So I know how unpopular it is to be seen as helping banks right now, especially when everyone is suffering
in part from their bad decisions. I promise you – I get it.
But I also know that in a time of crisis, we cannot afford to govern out of anger, or yield to the politics of the
moment. My job – our job – is to solve the problem. Our job is to govern with a sense of responsibility. I
will not spend a single penny for the purpose of rewarding a single Wall Street executive, but I will do
whatever it takes to help the small business that can’t pay its workers or the family that has saved and still
can’t get a mortgage.
That’s what this is about. It’s not about helping banks – it’s about helping people. Because when credit is 
available again, that young family can finally buy a new home. And then some company will hire workers to
build it. And then those workers will have money to spend, and if they can get a loan too, maybe they’ll
finally buy that car, or open their own business. Investors will return to the market, and American families 
will see their retirement secured once more. Slowly, but surely, confidence will return, and our economy will
recover.
So I ask this Congress to join me in doing whatever proves necessary. Because we cannot consign our 
nation to an open­ended recession. And to ensure that a crisis of this magnitude never happens again, I
ask Congress to move quickly on legislation that will finally reform our outdated regulatory system. It is time
to put in place tough, new common­sense rules of the road so that our financial market rewards drive and
innovation, and punishes short­cuts and abuse.
The recovery plan and the financial stability plan are the immediate steps we’re taking to revive our 
economy in the short­term. But the only way to fully restore America’s economic strength is to make the
long­term investments that will lead to new jobs, new industries, and a renewed ability to compete with the
rest of the world. The only way this century will be another American century is if we confront at last the
price of our dependence on oil and the high cost of health care; the schools that aren’t preparing our 
children and the mountain of debt they stand to inherit. That is our responsibility.
In the next few days, I will submit a budget to Congress. So often, we have come to view these documents 
as simply numbers on a page or laundry lists of programs. I see this document differently. I see it as a
vision for America – as a blueprint for our future. My budget does not attempt to solve every problem or address every issue. It reflects the stark reality of
what we’ve inherited – a trillion dollar deficit, a financial crisis, and a costly recession.
Given these realities, everyone in this chamber – Democrats and Republicans – will have to sacrifice some
worthy priorities for which there are no dollars. And that includes me.
But that does not mean we can afford to ignore our long­term challenges. I reject the view that says our 
problems will simply take care of themselves; that says government has no role in laying the foundation for 
our common prosperity.
For history tells a different story. History reminds us that at every moment of economic upheaval and
transformation, this nation has responded with bold action and big ideas. In the midst of civil war, we laid
railroad tracks from one coast to another that spurred commerce and industry. From the turmoil of the
Industrial Revolution came a system of public high schools that prepared our citizens for a new age. In the
wake of war and depression, the GI Bill sent a generation to college and created the largest middle­class in
history. And a twilight struggle for freedom led to a nation of highways, an American on the moon, and an
explosion of technology that still shapes our world.
In each case, government didn’t supplant private enterprise; it catalyzed private enterprise. It created the
conditions for thousands of entrepreneurs and new businesses to adapt and to thrive.
We are a nation that has seen promise amid peril, and claimed opportunity from ordeal. Now we must be
that nation again. That is why, even as it cuts back on the programs we don’t need, the budget I submit will
invest in the three areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future: energy, health care, and
education.
It begins with energy.
We know the country that harnesses the power of clean, renewable energy will lead the 21st century. And
yet, it is China that has launched the largest effort in history to make their economy energy efficient. We
invented solar technology, but we’ve fallen behind countries like Germany and Japan in producing it. New
plug­in hybrids roll off our assembly lines, but they will run on batteries made in Korea. Well I do not accept a future where the jobs and industries of tomorrow take root beyond our borders – and I
know you don’t either. It is time for America to lead again.
Thanks to our recovery plan, we will double this nation’s supply of renewable energy in the next three
years. We have also made the largest investment in basic research funding in American history – an
investment that will spur not only new discoveries in energy, but breakthroughs in medicine, science, and
technology.
We will soon lay down thousands of miles of power lines that can carry new energy to cities and towns 
across this country. And we will put Americans to work making our homes and buildings more efficient so
that we can save billions of dollars on our energy bills.
But to truly transform our economy, protect our security, and save our planet from the ravages of climate
change, we need to ultimately make clean, renewable energy the profitable kind of energy. So I ask this 
Congress to send me legislation that places a market­based cap on carbon pollution and drives the
production of more renewable energy in America. And to support that innovation, we will invest fifteen
billion dollars a year to develop technologies like wind power and solar power; advanced biofuels, clean
coal, and more fuel­efficient cars and trucks built right here in America.
As for our auto industry, everyone recognizes that years of bad decision­making and a global recession
have pushed our automakers to the brink. We should not, and will not, protect them from their own bad
practices. But we are committed to the goal of a re­tooled, re­imagined auto industry that can compete and
win. Millions of jobs depend on it. Scores of communities depend on it. And I believe the nation that
invented the automobile cannot walk away from it.
None of this will come without cost, nor will it be easy. But this is America. We don’t do what’s easy. We
do what is necessary to move this country forward.
For that same reason, we must also address the crushing cost of health care.
This is a cost that now causes a bankruptcy in America every thirty seconds.
By the end of the year, it could cause 1.5 million Americans to lose their homes. In the last eight years, premiums have grown four times faster than wages. And in each of these years, one million more
Americans have lost their health insurance. It is one of the major reasons why small businesses close their 
doors and corporations ship jobs overseas. And it’s one of the largest and fastest­growing parts of our 
budget.
Given these facts, we can no longer afford to put health care reform on hold.
Already, we have done more to advance the cause of health care reform in the last thirty days than we have
in the last decade. When it was days old, this Congress passed a law to provide and protect health
insurance for eleven million American children whose parents work full­time. Our recovery plan will invest in
electronic health records and new technology that will reduce errors, bring down costs, ensure privacy, and
save lives. It will launch a new effort to conquer a disease that has touched the life of nearly every 
American by seeking a cure for cancer in our time. And it makes the largest investment ever in preventive
care, because that is one of the best ways to keep our people healthy and our costs under control.
This budget builds on these reforms. It includes an historic commitment to comprehensive health care
reform – a down­payment on the principle that we must have quality, affordable health care for every 
American. It’s a commitment that’s paid for in part by efficiencies in our system that are long overdue. And
it’s a step we must take if we hope to bring down our deficit in the years to come.
Now, there will be many different opinions and ideas about how to achieve reform, and that is why I’m 
bringing together businesses and workers, doctors and health care providers, Democrats and Republicans 
to begin work on this issue next week.
I suffer no illusions that this will be an easy process. It will be hard. But I also know that nearly a century 
after Teddy Roosevelt first called for reform, the cost of our health care has weighed down our economy and
the conscience of our nation long enough. So let there be no doubt: health care reform cannot wait, it must
not wait, and it will not wait another year.
The third challenge we must address is the urgent need to expand the promise of education in America.
In a global economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your knowledge, a good education is no
longer just a pathway to opportunity – it is a pre­requisite.
Right now, three­quarters of the fastest­growing occupations require more than a high school diploma. And
yet, just over half of our citizens have that level of education. We have one of the highest high school
dropout rates of any industrialized nation. And half of the students who begin college never finish.
This is a prescription for economic decline, because we know the countries that out­teach us today will out­  compete us tomorrow. That is why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has 
access to a complete and competitive education – from the day they are born to the day they begin a
career.
Already, we have made an historic investment in education through the economic recovery plan. We have
dramatically expanded early childhood education and will continue to improve its quality, because we know
that the most formative learning comes in those first years of life. We have made college affordable for 
nearly seven million more students. And we have provided the resources necessary to prevent painful cuts 
and teacher layoffs that would set back our children’s progress.
But we know that our schools don’t just need more resources. They need more reform. That is why this 
budget creates new incentives for teacher performance; pathways for advancement, and rewards for 
success. We’ll invest in innovative programs that are already helping schools meet high standards and
close achievement gaps. And we will expand our commitment to charter schools.
It is our responsibility as lawmakers and educators to make this system work. But it is the responsibility of
every citizen to participate in it. And so tonight, I ask every American to commit to at least one year or more
of higher education or career training. This can be community college or a four­year school; vocational
training or an apprenticeship. But whatever the training may be, every American will need to get more than
a high school diploma. And dropping out of high school is no longer an option. It’s not just quitting on
yourself, it’s quitting on your country – and this country needs and values the talents of every American. That is why we will provide the support necessary for you to complete college and meet a new goal: by 
2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.
I know that the price of tuition is higher than ever, which is why if you are willing to volunteer in your 
neighborhood or give back to your community or serve your country, we will make sure that you can afford a
higher education. And to encourage a renewed spirit of national service for this and future generations, I
ask this Congress to send me the bipartisan legislation that bears the name of Senator Orrin Hatch as well
as an American who has never stopped asking what he can do for his country – Senator Edward Kennedy.
These education policies will open the doors of opportunity for our children. But it is up to us to ensure they 
walk through them. In the end, there is no program or policy that can substitute for a mother or father who
will attend those parent/teacher conferences, or help with homework after dinner, or turn off the TV, put
away the video games, and read to their child. I speak to you not just as a President, but as a father when I
say that responsibility for our children's education must begin at home.
There is, of course, another responsibility we have to our children. And that is the responsibility to ensure
that we do not pass on to them a debt they cannot pay. With the deficit we inherited, the cost of the crisis 
we face, and the long­term challenges we must meet, it has never been more important to ensure that as 
our economy recovers, we do what it takes to bring this deficit down.
I’m proud that we passed the recovery plan free of earmarks, and I want to pass a budget next year that
ensures that each dollar we spend reflects only our most important national priorities.
Yesterday, I held a fiscal summit where I pledged to cut the deficit in half by the end of my first term in
office. My administration has also begun to go line by line through the federal budget in order to eliminate
wasteful and ineffective programs. As you can imagine, this is a process that will take some time. But we’re
starting with the biggest lines. We have already identified two trillion dollars in savings over the next
decade.
In this budget, we will end education programs that don’t work and end direct payments to large
agribusinesses that don’t need them. We’ll eliminate the no­bid contracts that have wasted billions in Iraq, and reform our defense budget so that we’re not paying for Cold War­era weapons systems we don’t use. We will root out the waste, fraud, and abuse in our Medicare program that doesn’t make our seniors any 
healthier, and we will restore a sense of fairness and balance to our tax code by finally ending the tax 
breaks for corporations that ship our jobs overseas.
In order to save our children from a future of debt, we will also end the tax breaks for the wealthiest 2% of
Americans. But let me perfectly clear, because I know you’ll hear the same old claims that rolling back 
these tax breaks means a massive tax increase on the American people: if your family earns less than
$250,000 a year, you will not see your taxes increased a single dime. I repeat: not one single dime. In fact,
the recovery plan provides a tax cut – that’s right, a tax cut – for 95% of working families. And these checks 
are on the way.
To preserve our long­term fiscal health, we must also address the growing costs in Medicare and Social
Security. Comprehensive health care reform is the best way to strengthen Medicare for years to come. And
we must also begin a conversation on how to do the same for Social Security, while creating tax­free
universal savings accounts for all Americans.
Finally, because we’re also suffering from a deficit of trust, I am committed to restoring a sense of honesty 
and accountability to our budget. That is why this budget looks ahead ten years and accounts for spending
that was left out under the old rules – and for the first time, that includes the full cost of fighting in Iraq and
Afghanistan. For seven years, we have been a nation at war. No longer will we hide its price. We are now carefully reviewing our policies in both wars, and I will soon announce a way forward in Iraq
that leaves Iraq to its people and responsibly ends this war.
And with our friends and allies, we will forge a new and comprehensive strategy for Afghanistan and
Pakistan to defeat al Qaeda and combat extremism. Because I will not allow terrorists to plot against the
American people from safe havens half a world away.
As we meet here tonight, our men and women in uniform stand watch abroad and more are readying to
deploy. To each and every one of them, and to the families who bear the quiet burden of their absence, Americans are united in sending one message: we honor your service, we are inspired by your sacrifice, and you have our unyielding support. To relieve the strain on our forces, my budget increases the number 
of our soldiers and Marines. And to keep our sacred trust with those who serve, we will raise their pay, and
give our veterans the expanded health care and benefits that they have earned.
To overcome extremism, we must also be vigilant in upholding the values our troops defend – because
there is no force in the world more powerful than the example of America. That is why I have ordered the
closing of the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, and will seek swift and certain justice for captured
terrorists – because living our values doesn’t make us weaker, it makes us safer and it makes us stronger.
And that is why I can stand here tonight and say without exception or equivocation that the United States of
America does not torture.
In words and deeds, we are showing the world that a new era of engagement has begun. For we know that
America cannot meet the threats of this century alone, but the world cannot meet them without America. We cannot shun the negotiating table, nor ignore the foes or forces that could do us harm. We are instead
called to move forward with the sense of confidence and candor that serious times demand.
To seek progress toward a secure and lasting peace between Israel and her neighbors, we have appointed
an envoy to sustain our effort. To meet the challenges of the 21st century – from terrorism to nuclear 
proliferation; from pandemic disease to cyber threats to crushing poverty – we will strengthen old alliances,
forge new ones, and use all elements of our national power.
And to respond to an economic crisis that is global in scope, we are working with the nations of the G­20 to
restore confidence in our financial system, avoid the possibility of escalating protectionism, and spur 
demand for American goods in markets across the globe. For the world depends on us to have a strong
economy, just as our economy depends on the strength of the world’s.
As we stand at this crossroads of history, the eyes of all people in all nations are once again upon us – watching to see what we do with this moment; waiting for us to lead.
Those of us gathered here tonight have been called to govern in extraordinary times. It is a tremendous 
burden, but also a great privilege – one that has been entrusted to few generations of Americans. For in our 
hands lies the ability to shape our world for good or for ill.
I know that it is easy to lose sight of this truth – to become cynical and doubtful; consumed with the petty 
and the trivial.
But in my life, I have also learned that hope is found in unlikely places; that inspiration often comes not from 
those with the most power or celebrity, but from the dreams and aspirations of Americans who are anything
but ordinary.
I think about Leonard Abess, the bank president from Miami who reportedly cashed out of his company,
took a $60 million bonus, and gave it out to all 399 people who worked for him, plus another 72 who used to
work for him. He didn’t tell anyone, but when the local newspaper found out, he simply said, ''I knew some
of these people since I was 7 years old. I didn't feel right getting the money myself." 
I think about Greensburg, Kansas, a town that was completely destroyed by a tornado, but is being rebuilt
by its residents as a global example of how clean energy can power an entire community – how it can bring
jobs and businesses to a place where piles of bricks and rubble once lay. "The tragedy was terrible," said
one of the men who helped them rebuild. "But the folks here know that it also provided an incredible
opportunity." 
And I think about Ty’Sheoma Bethea, the young girl from that school I visited in Dillon, South Carolina – a
place where the ceilings leak, the paint peels off the walls, and they have to stop teaching six times a day 
because the train barrels by their classroom. She has been told that her school is hopeless, but the other 
day after class she went to the public library and typed up a letter to the people sitting in this room. She
even asked her principal for the money to buy a stamp.
The letter asks us for help, and says, "We are just students trying to become lawyers, doctors, congressmen
like yourself and one day president, so we can make a change to not just the state of South Carolina but
also the world. We are not quitters." 
We are not quitters.
These words and these stories tell us something about the spirit of the people who sent us here. They tell
us that even in the most trying times, amid the most difficult circumstances, there is a generosity, a
resilience, a decency, and a determination that perseveres; a willingness to take responsibility for our future
and for posterity.
Their resolve must be our inspiration. Their concerns must be our cause. And we must show them and all
our people that we are equal to the task before us.
I know that we haven’t agreed on every issue thus far, and there are surely times in the future when we will
part ways. But I also know that every American who is sitting here tonight loves this country and wants it to
succeed. That must be the starting point for every debate we have in the coming months, and where we
return after those debates are done. That is the foundation on which the American people expect us to build
common ground.
And if we do – if we come together and lift this nation from the depths of this crisis; if we put our people back 
to work and restart the engine of our prosperity; if we confront without fear the challenges of our time and
summon that enduring spirit of an America that does not quit, then someday years from now our children
can tell their children that this was the time when we performed, in the words that are carved into this very 
chamber, "something worthy to be remembered."  Thank you, God Bless you, and may God Bless the
United States of America.
Good morning Marines. Good morning Camp Lejeune. Good morning Jacksonville. Thank you for that
outstanding welcome. I want to thank Lieutenant General Hejlik for hosting me here today.
I also want to acknowledge all of our soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines serving in Iraq and Afghanistan.
That includes the Camp Lejeune Marines now serving with -- or soon joining -- the Second Marine
Expeditionary Force in Iraq; those with Special Purpose Marine Air Ground Task Force in Afghanistan; and
those among the 8,000 Marines who are preparing to deploy to Afghanistan. We have you in our prayers.
We pay tribute to your service. We thank you and your families for all that you do for America. And I want all
of you to know that there is no higher honor or greater responsibility than serving as your Commander-inChief.
I also want to take this opportunity to acknowledge Ryan Crocker, who recently completed his service as our
Ambassador to Iraq. Throughout his career, Ryan always took on the toughest assignments. He is an
example of the very best that this nation has to offer, and we owe him a great debt of gratitude. He carried
on his work with an extraordinary degree of cooperation with two of our finest Generals -- General David
Petraeus, and General Ray Odierno -- who will be critical in carrying forward the strategy that I will outline
today.
Next month will mark the sixth anniversary of the war in Iraq. By any measure, this has already been a long
war. For the men and women of America’s armed forces -- and for your families -- this war has been one of
the most extraordinary chapters of service in the history of our nation. You have endured tour after tour after
tour of duty. You have known the dangers of combat and the lonely distance of loved ones. You have fought
against tyranny and disorder.
You have bled for your best friends and for unknown Iraqis. And you have borne an enormous burden for
your fellow citizens, while extending a precious opportunity to the people of Iraq. Under tough
circumstances, the men and women of the United States military have served with honor, and succeeded
beyond any expectation.
Today, I have come to speak to you about how the war in Iraq will end.
To understand where we need to go in Iraq, it is important for the American people to understand where we
now stand. Thanks in great measure to your service, the situation in Iraq has improved. Violence has been
reduced substantially from the horrific sectarian killing of 2006 and 2007. Al Qaeda in Iraq has been dealt a
serious blow by our troops and Iraq’s Security Forces, and through our partnership with Sunni Arabs. The
capacity of Iraq’s Security Forces has improved, and Iraq’s leaders have taken steps toward political
accommodation. The relative peace and strong participation in January’s provincial elections sent a
powerful message to the world about how far Iraqis have come in pursuing their aspirations through a
peaceful political process.
But let there be no doubt: Iraq is not yet secure, and there will be difficult days ahead. Violence will continue
to be a part of life in Iraq. Too many fundamental political questions about Iraq’s future remain unresolved.
Too many Iraqis are still displaced or destitute. Declining oil revenues will put an added strain on a
government that has had difficulty delivering basic services. Not all of Iraq’s neighbors are contributing to its
security. Some are working at times to undermine it. And even as Iraq’s government is on a surer footing, it
is not yet a full partner -- politically and economically -- in the region, or with the international community
In short, today there is a renewed cause for hope in Iraq, but that hope rests upon an emerging foundation.
On my first full day in office, I directed my national security team to undertake a comprehensive review of
our strategy in Iraq to determine the best way to strengthen that foundation, while strengthening American
national security. I have listened to my Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and commanders on
the ground. We have acted with careful consideration of events on the ground; with respect for the security
agreements between the United States and Iraq; and with a critical recognition that the long-term solution in
Iraq must be political -- not military. Because the most important decisions that have to be made about Iraq’s
future must now be made by Iraqis.
We have also taken into account the simple reality that America can no longer afford to see Iraq in isolation
from other priorities: we face the challenge of refocusing on Afghanistan and Pakistan; of relieving the
burden on our military; and of rebuilding our struggling economy -- and these are challenges that we will
meet.
Today, I can announce that our review is complete, and that the United States will pursue a new strategy to
end the war in Iraq through a transition to full Iraqi responsibility.
This strategy is grounded in a clear and achievable goal shared by the Iraqi people and the American
people: an Iraq that is sovereign, stable, and self-reliant.
To achieve that goal, we will work to promote an Iraqi government that is just, representative, and
accountable, and that provides neither support nor safe-haven to terrorists. We will help Iraq build new ties
of trade and commerce with the world. And we will forge a partnership with the people and government of
Iraq that contributes to the peace and security of the region.
What we will not do is let the pursuit of the perfect stand in the way of achievable goals. We cannot rid Iraq
of all who oppose America or sympathize with our adversaries. We cannot police Iraq’s streets until they are
completely safe, nor stay until Iraq’s union is perfected. We cannot sustain indefinitely a commitment that
has put a strain on our military, and will cost the American people nearly a trillion dollars. America’s men
and women in uniform have fought block by block, province by province, year after year, to give the Iraqis
this chance to choose a better future. Now, we must ask the Iraqi people to seize it.
The first part of this strategy is therefore the responsible removal of our combat brigades from Iraq.
As a candidate for President, I made clear my support for a timeline of 16 months to carry out this
drawdown, while pledging to consult closely with our military commanders upon taking office to ensure that
we preserve the gains we’ve made and protect our troops. Those consultations are now complete, and I
have chosen a timeline that will remove our combat brigades over the next 18 months.
Let me say this as plainly as I can: by August 31, 2010, our combat mission in Iraq will end.
As we carry out this drawdown, my highest priority will be the safety and security of our troops and civilians
in Iraq. We will proceed carefully, and I will consult closely with my military commanders on the ground and
with the Iraqi government. There will surely be difficult periods and tactical adjustments. But our enemies
should be left with no doubt: this plan gives our military the forces and the flexibility they need to support our
Iraqi partners, and to succeed.
After we remove our combat brigades, our mission will change from combat to supporting the Iraqi
government and its Security Forces as they take the absolute lead in securing their country. As I have long
said, we will retain a transitional force to carry out three distinct functions: training, equipping, and advising
Iraqi Security Forces as long as they remain non-sectarian; conducting targeted counter-terrorism missions;
and protecting our ongoing civilian and military efforts within Iraq. Initially, this force will likely be made up of
35-50,000 U.S. troops.
Through this period of transition, we will carry out further redeployments. And under the Status of Forces
Agreement with the Iraqi government, I intend to remove all U.S. troops from Iraq by the end of 2011. We
will complete this transition to Iraqi responsibility, and we will bring our troops home with the honor that they
have earned.
As we responsibly remove our combat brigades, we will pursue the second part of our strategy: sustained
diplomacy on behalf of a more peaceful and prosperous Iraq.
The drawdown of our military should send a clear signal that Iraq’s future is now its own responsibility. The
long-term success of the Iraqi nation will depend upon decisions made by Iraq’s leaders and the fortitude of
the Iraqi people. Iraq is a sovereign country with legitimate institutions; America cannot -- and should not --
take their place. However, a strong political, diplomatic, and civilian effort on our part can advance progress
and help lay a foundation for lasting peace and security.
This effort will be led by our new Ambassador to Iraq -- Chris Hill. From his time in the Peace Corps, to his
work in Kosovo and Korea, Ambassador Hill has been tested, and he has shown the pragmatism and skill
that we need right now. He will be supported by the courageous and capable work of so many American
diplomats and aid workers who are serving in Iraq.
Going forward, we can make a difference on several fronts. We will work with the United Nations to support
national elections, while helping Iraqis improve local government. We can serve as an honest broker in
pursuit of fair and durable agreements on issues that have divided Iraq’s leaders. And just as we will support
Iraq’s Security Forces, we will help Iraqi institutions strengthen their capacity to protect the rule of law,
confront corruption, and deliver basic services.
Diplomacy and assistance is also required to help the millions of displaced Iraqis. These men, women and
children are a living consequence of this war and a challenge to stability in the region, and they must
become a part of Iraq’s reconciliation and recovery. America has a strategic interest -- and a moral
responsibility -- to act. In the coming months, my administration will provide more assistance and take steps
to increase international support for countries already hosting refugees; we’ll cooperate with others to
resettle Iraqis facing great personal risk; and we will work with the Iraqi government over time to resettle
refugees and displaced Iraqis within Iraq -- because there are few more powerful indicators of lasting peace
than displaced citizens returning home.
Now, before I go any further, I want to take a moment to speak directly to the people of Iraq.
You are a great nation, rooted in the cradle of civilization. You are joined together by enduring
accomplishments, and a history that connects you as surely as the two rivers carved into your land. In years
past, you have persevered through tyranny and terror; through personal insecurity and sectarian violence.
And instead of giving in to the forces of disunion, you stepped back from a descent into civil war, and
showed a proud resilience that deserves respect.
Our nations have known difficult times together. But ours is a bond forged by shared bloodshed, and
countless friendships among our people. We Americans have offered our most precious resource -- our
young men and women -- to work with you to rebuild what was destroyed by despotism; to root out our
common enemies; and to seek peace and prosperity for our children and grandchildren, and for yours.
There are those who will try to prevent that future for Iraq -- who will insist that Iraq’s differences cannot be
reconciled without more killing. They represent the forces that destroy nations and lead only to despair, and
they will test our will in the months and years to come. America, too, has known these forces. We endured
the pain of Civil War, and bitter divisions of region and race. But hostility and hatred are no match for justice;
they offer no pathway to peace; and they must not stand between the people of Iraq and a future of
reconciliation and hope.
So to the Iraqi people, let me be clear about America’s intentions. The United States pursues no claim on
your territory or your resources. We respect your sovereignty and the tremendous sacrifices you have made
for your country. We seek a full transition to Iraqi responsibility for the security of your country. And going
forward, we can build a lasting relationship founded upon mutual interests and mutual respect as Iraq takes
its rightful place in the community of nations.
That leads me to the third part of our strategy -- comprehensive American engagement across the region.
The future of Iraq is inseparable from the future of the broader Middle East, so we must work with our
friends and partners to establish a new framework that advances Iraq’s security and the region’s. It is time
for Iraq to be a full partner in a regional dialogue, and for Iraq’s neighbors to establish productive and
normalized relations with Iraq. And going forward, the United States will pursue principled and sustained
engagement with all of the nations in the region, and that will include Iran and Syria.
This reflects a fundamental truth: we can no longer deal with regional challenges in isolation -- we need a
smarter, more sustainable and comprehensive approach. That is why we are renewing our diplomacy, while
relieving the burden on our military. That is why we are refocusing on al Qaeda in Afghanistan and Pakistan;
developing a strategy to use all elements of American power to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear
weapon; and actively seeking a lasting peace between Israel and the Arab world. And that is why we have
named three of America’s most accomplished diplomats -- George Mitchell, Dennis Ross and Richard
Holbrooke -- to support Secretary Clinton and me as we carry forward this agenda.
Every nation and every group must know -- whether you wish America good or ill -- that the end of the war in
Iraq will enable a new era of American leadership and engagement in the Middle East. And that era has just
begun.
Finally, I want to be very clear that my strategy for ending the war in Iraq does not end with military plans or
diplomatic agendas -- it endures through our commitment to uphold our sacred trust with every man and
woman who has served in Iraq.
You make up a fraction of the American population, but in an age when so many people and institutions
have acted irresponsibly, you did the opposite -- you volunteered to bear the heaviest burden. And for you
and for your families, the war does not end when you come home. It lives on in memories of your fellow
soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines who gave their lives. It endures in the wound that is slow to heal, the
disability that isn’t going away, the dream that wakes you at night, or the stiffening in your spine when a car
backfires down the street.
You and your families have done your duty -- now a grateful nation must do ours. That is why I am
increasing the number of soldiers and Marines, so that we lessen the burden on those who are serving. And
that is why I have committed to expanding our system of veterans health care to serve more patients, and to
provide better care in more places. We will continue building new wounded warrior facilities across America,
and invest in new ways of identifying and treating the signature wounds of this war: Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder and Traumatic Brain Injury, as well as other combat injuries.
We also know that service does not end with the person wearing the uniform. In her visits with military
families across the country, my wife Michelle has learned firsthand about the unique burden that your
families endure every day. I want you to know this: military families are a top priority for Michelle and me,
and they will be a top priority for my administration. We’ll raise military pay, and continue providing quality
child-care, job-training for spouses, and expanded counseling and outreach to families that have known the
separation and stress of war. We will also heed the lesson of history -- that those who fight in battle can
form the backbone of our middle class -- by implementing a 21st century GI Bill to help our veterans live
their dreams.
As a nation, we have had our share of debates about the war in Iraq. It has, at times, divided us as a
people. To this very day, there are some Americans who want to stay in Iraq longer, and some who want to
leave faster. But there should be no disagreement on what the men and women of our military have
achieved.
And so I want to be very clear: We sent our troops to Iraq to do away with Saddam Hussein’s regime -- and
you got the job done. We kept our troops in Iraq to help establish a sovereign government -- and you got the
job done. And we will leave the Iraqi people with a hard-earned opportunity to live a better life -- that is your
achievement; that is the prospect that you have made possible.
There are many lessons to be learned from what we’ve experienced. We have learned that America must
go to war with clearly defined goals, which is why I’ve ordered a review of our policy in Afghanistan. We
have learned that we must always weigh the costs of action, and communicate those costs candidly to the
American people, which is why I’ve put Iraq and Afghanistan into my budget. We have learned that in the
21st century, we must use all elements of American power to achieve our objectives, which is why I am
committed to building our civilian national security capacity so that the burden is not continually pushed on
to our military. We have learned that our political leaders must pursue the broad and bipartisan support that
our national security policies depend upon, which is why I will consult with Congress and in carrying out my
plans. And we have learned the importance of working closely with friends and allies, which is why we are
launching a new era of engagement in the world.
The starting point for our policies must always be the safety of the American people. I know that you -- the
men and women of the finest fighting force in the history of the world -- can meet any challenge, and defeat
any foe. And as long as I am your Commander-in-Chief, I promise you that I will only send you into harm’s
way when it is absolutely necessary, and provide you with the equipment and support you need to get the
job done. That is the most important lesson of all -- for the consequences of war are dire, the sacrifices
immeasurable.
You know because you have seen those sacrifices. You have lived them. And we all honor them.
"Semper Fidelis" -- it means always being faithful to Corps, and to country, and to the memory of fallen
comrades like Corporal Jonathan Yale and Lance Corporal Jordan Haerter. These young men enlisted in a
time of war, knowing they would face great danger. They came here, to Camp Lejeune, as they trained for
their mission. And last April, they were standing guard in Anbar. In an age when suicide is a weapon, they
were suddenly faced with an oncoming truck filled with explosives. These two Marines stood their ground.
These two Marines opened fire. And these two Marines stopped that truck. When the thousands of pounds
of explosives detonated, they had saved fifty Marines and Iraqi police who would have been in the truck’s
path, but Corporal Yale and Lance Corporal Haerter lost their own lives. Jonathan was 21. Jordan was 19.
In the town where Jordan Haerter was from, a bridge was dedicated in his name. One Marine who traveled
to the ceremony said: "We flew here from all over the country to pay tribute to our friend Jordan, who risked
his life to save us. We wouldn’t be here without him."
America’s time in Iraq is filled with stories of men and women like this. Their names are written into bridges
and town squares. They are etched into stones at Arlington, and in quiet places of rest across our land.
They are spoken in schools and on city blocks. They live on in the memories of those who wear your
uniform, in the hearts of those they loved, and in the freedom of the nation they served.
Each American who has served in Iraq has their own story. Each of you has your own story. And that story
is now a part of the history of the United States of America -- a nation that exists only because free men and
women have bled for it from the beaches of Normandy to the deserts of Anbar; from the mountains of Korea
to the streets of Kandahar. You teach us that the price of freedom is great. Your sacrifice should challenge
all of us -- every single American -- to ask what we can do to be better citizens.
There will be more danger in the months ahead. We will face new tests and unforeseen trials. But thanks to
the sacrifices of those who have served, we have forged hard-earned progress, we are leaving Iraq to its
people, and we have begun the work of ending this war.
Thank you, God Bless you, and God Bless the United States of America. Semper Fi.
Good afternoon, or good evening -- we're running a little bit late.
Earlier today, we finished a very productive summit that will be, I believe, a turning point in our pursuit of
global economic recovery.
By any measure, the London summit was historic. It was historic because of the size and the scope of the
challenges that we face, and because of the timeliness and magnitude of our response.
The challenge is clear. The global economy is contracting. Trade is shrinking. Unemployment is rising.
The international finance system is nearly frozen. Even these facts can't fully capture the crisis that we're
confronting, because behind them is the pain and uncertainty that so many people are facing. We see it
back in the United States. We see it here in London. We see it around the world: families losing their
homes, workers losing their jobs and their savings, students who are deferring their dreams. So many have
lost so much. Just to underscore this point, back in the United States, jobless claims released today were
the highest in 26 years. We owe it to all of our citizens to act, and to act with a sense of urgency.
In an age where our economies are linked more closely than ever before, the whole world has been touched
by this devastating downturn. And today, the world's leaders have responded with an unprecedented set of
comprehensive and coordinated actions.
Now, just keep in mind some historical context. Faced with similar global challenges in the past, the world
was slow to act, and people paid an enormous price. That was true in the Great Depression, when nations
prolonged and worsened the crisis by turning inward, waiting for more than a decade to meet the challenge
together. Even as recently as the 1980s, the slow global response deepened and widened a debt crisis in
Latin America that pushed millions into poverty.
Today, we've learned the lessons of history. I know that in the days leading up to the summit, some of you
in the press, some commentators, confused honest and open debate with irreconcilable differences. But
after weeks of preparation, and two days of careful negotiation, we have agreed on a series of
unprecedented steps to restore growth and prevent a crisis like this from happening again.
Let me outline what I think has been most significant.
Number one, we are committed to growth and job creation. All G20 nations have acted to stimulate
demand, which will total well over $2 trillion in global fiscal expansion. The United States is also partnering
with the private sector to clean out the troubled assets, the legacy assets that are crippling some banks, and
using the full force of the government to ensure that our action leads directly to loans to businesses large
and small, as well as individuals who depend on credit. And these efforts will be amplified by our G20
partners, who are pursuing similarly comprehensive programs.
And we also agreed on bold action to support developing countries, so that we aren't faced with declining
markets that the global economy depends on. Together, the G20 is tripling the IMF's lending capacity and
promoting lending by multilateral development banks to increase the purchasing power and expand markets
in every country.
We've also rejected the protectionism that could deepen this crisis. History tells us that turning inward can
help turn a downturn into a depression. And this cooperation between the world's leading economies
signals our support for open markets, as does our multilateral commitment to trade finance that will grow our
exports and create new jobs.
That's all on the growth front.
And next we made enormous strides in committing ourselves to comprehensive reform of a failed regulatory
system. And together, I believe that we must put an end to the bubble-and-bust economy that has stood in
the way of sustained growth and enabled abusive risk-taking that endangers our prosperity.
At home, back in the States, our efforts began with the approach that Secretary Geithner proposed last
week, the strongest regulatory reforms any nation has contemplated so far to prevent the massive failure of
responsibility that we have already seen. Today, these principles have informed and enabled the
coordinated action that we will take with our G20 partners.
To prevent future crises, we agreed to increased transparency and capital protections for financial
institutions. We're extending supervision to all systemically important institutions, markets and products,
including hedge funds. We'll identify jurisdictions that fail to cooperate, including tax havens, and take
action to defend our financial system. We will reestablish the Financial Stability Forum with a stronger
mandate. And we will reform and expand the IMF and World Bank so they are more efficient, effective and
representative.
Finally, we are protecting those who don't always have a voice at the G20, but who have suffered greatly in
this crisis. And the United States is ready to lead in this endeavor. In the coming days, I intend to work with
Congress to provide $448 million in immediate assistance to vulnerable populations -- from Africa to Latin
America -- and to double support for food safety to over $1 billion so that we are giving people the tools they
need to lift themselves out of poverty. We will also support the United Nations and World Bank as they
coordinate the rapid assistance necessary to prevent humanitarian catastrophe.
I have to say, though, that this is not just charity. These are all future markets for all countries, and future
drivers of world economic growth.
Let me also underscore my appreciation to Prime Minister Brown, his entire team, and all my colleagues
from around the world who contributed to the summit's success. You know, it's hard for 20 heads of state to
bridge their differences. We've all got our own national policies; we all have our own assumptions, our own
political cultures. But our citizens are all hurting. They all need us to come together. So I'm pleased that
the G20 has agreed to meet again this fall, because I believe that this is just the beginning. Our problems
are not going to be solved in one meeting; they're not going to be solved in two meetings. We're going to
have to be proactive in shaping events and persistent in monitoring our progress to determine whether
further action is needed.
I also want to just make a few remarks about additional meetings I had outside of the G20 context. While
here in London I had the opportunity to hold bilateral meetings with leaders of Russia, China, South Korea,
Saudi Arabia and India, as well as Great Britain. And these discussions were extraordinarily valuable and
productive. Of course, we spoke about additional steps to promote economic recovery and growth. But we
also discussed coordinated actions on a range of issues: how we could reduce the nuclear threat; how we
could forge a coordinated response to North Korea's planned missile launch; how we can turn back
terrorism and stabilize Afghanistan; how we can protect our planet from the scourge of climate change. I'm
encouraged that we laid the groundwork for real and lasting progress on a host of these issues.
Ultimately, the challenges of the 21st century can't be met without collective action. Agreement will almost
never be easy, and results won't always come quickly. But I am committed to respecting different points of
view, and to forging a consensus instead of dictating our terms. That's how we made progress in the last
few days. And that's how we will advance and uphold our ideals in the months and years to come.
You know, at home, I've often spoken about a new era of responsibility. And I believe strongly that this era
must not end at our borders. In a world that's more and more interconnected, we all have responsibilities to
work together to solve common challenges. And although it will take time, I am confident that we will rebuild
global prosperity if we act with a common sense of purpose, persistence, and the optimism that the moment
demands.
So I appreciate your attention, and I'm going to take a few questions. I've got a list of a few people I'm going
to call on and then I will intersperse some folks I'm calling on randomly.
Helene Cooper.
: Well, I think we did okay. You know, when I came here, it was with the intention of
listening and learning, but also providing American leadership. And I think that the document that has been
produced as well as the concrete actions that will follow reflect a range of our priorities.
We wanted to make sure that we had a strong, coordinated response to growth -- and that's reflected in the
document and in the actions that will be taken. We thought it was important to make sure that we had a
strong, coordinated regulatory response -- and many of the details of the regulatory response draw from
principles that we had developed prior to coming here.
We felt that it was very important to strengthen our international financial institutions because developing
countries, emerging markets are threatened -- even though they may not have been the cause of this crisis -
- they are threatened by capital flight; they're threatened by reduced trade finance; drops in consumer
demand in developed countries that were their export markets, and so we knew that it was going to be
important to provide those countries with assistance. And we have created as fundamental a reworking of
the resources available to these international financial institutions as anything we've done in the last several
decades.
So, overall, I'm pleased with the product. And I'll leave it to others to determine whether me and my team
had anything to do with that. All right?
Chuck Todd. Chuck.
Well, as I said before, we've got a global economy, and if we're taking actions in
isolation in the United States, but those actions are contradicted overseas, then we're only going to be
halfway effective -- maybe not even half.
You've seen, for example, a drastic decline in U.S. exports over the last several months. You look at a
company like Caterpillar, in my home state of Illinois, which up until last year was doing extraordinarily well;
in fact, export growth was what had sustained it even after the recession had begun. As a consequence of
the world recession, as a consequence of the contagion from the financial markets debilitating the
economies elsewhere, Caterpillar is now in very bad shape. So if we want to get Caterpillar back on its feet,
if we want to get all those export companies back on their feet, so that they are hiring, putting people back to
work, putting money in people's pockets, we've got to make sure that the global economy as a whole is
successful.
And this document, which affirms the need for all countries to take fiscal responses that increase demand,
that encourages the openness of markets, those are all going to be helpful in us being able to fix what ails
the economy back home.
Let me mix in a -- Justin Webb, BBC. Where's Justin? There he is. Go ahead.
Well, I think that if you look at the language of the document, there are probably
some areas where it wasn't so much of a sacrifice as it might not have been our number-one priority, but it
became clear that it was very important to certain other actors.
I'd rather not specify what those precise items would be, because this is a collective document. But there's
no doubt that each country has its own quirks and own particular issues that a leader may decide is really,
really important; something that is non-negotiable for them. And what we tried to do as much as possible
was to accommodate those issues in a way that didn't -- did not hamper the effectiveness of the overall
document to address what I think are the core issues related to this crisis.
Now, keep in mind -- I think that this kind of coordination really is historic. I said in the meeting that if you
had imagined 10 years ago, or 20 years ago, or 30 years ago, that you'd have the leaders of Germany,
France, China, Russia, Brazil, South Africa, a President of the United States named Obama -- former
adversaries, in some cases former mortal enemies, negotiating this swiftly on behalf of fixing the global
economy, you would have said, that's crazy. And yet it was happening, and it happened with relatively little
-- relatively few hiccups. And I think that's a testimony to the great work that Gordon Brown did, and his
team, in organizing the summit, the collective work in our teams in doing some good preparation, some
good ground work. So I'm very proud of what's been done.
This alone is not enough. And obviously the actions that each of us take in our individual countries are still
absolutely vital. So we have a set of principles, for example, around dealing with systemic risk that I think
will be very important in preventing the kinds of financial crises that we've seen.
That does not entirely solve the problem of toxic assets that are still in U.S. banks and certain British banks
and certain European banks. And how each individual nation acts to deal with that is still going to be vitally
important. How well we execute the respective stimulus programs around the world is going to be very
important. The quicker they are, the more effective they are at actually boosting demand, the more all of us
will benefit. The more encumbered they are by bureaucracy and mismanagement and corruption, that will
hamper our development efforts as a whole.
So this is not a panacea, but it is a critical step, and I think it lays the foundation so that, should the actions
that we've taken individually and collectively so far not succeed in boosting global demand and growth,
should you continue to see a freezing of credit or a hemorrhaging of jobs around the world, I think we've
created a good foundation for this leadership to come back together again and take additional steps until we
get it right.
Well, you know, I didn't accompany President Bush on his various summits, so I
don't know how he was operating. And I won't -- I won't warrant a guess on that.
I can tell you that what I've tried to do since I started running for President and since I was sworn in as
President, is to communicate the notion that America is a critical actor and leader on the world stage, and
that we shouldn't be embarrassed about that, but that we exercise our leadership best when we are
listening; when we recognize that the world is a complicated place and that we are going to have to act in
partnership with other countries; when we lead by example; when we show some element of humility and
recognize that we may not always have the best answer, but we can always encourage the best answer and
support the best answer.
So I think that's the -- that's the approach that we've tried to take in our foreign policy since my
administration came in. Now, we come in at extraordinarily challenging times, and yet I actually think that
that calls for this type of leadership even more. But, ultimately, we won't know how effective we are until we
look back a year from now, or two years from now, or three years from now and see if it worked.
And what the American people care about I suspect are the same thing that the British people care about,
and that is, are you putting people back to work? Are businesses growing again? Is business -- is credit
flowing again? And, you know -- and that's just true with respect to this summit. But when it comes to our
Afghanistan policy, the question is going to be, have we made ourselves safer; have we reduced the risks
and incidents of terrorism?
And so the proof of the pudding is in the eating. But hopefully, I think at least we've set a tone
internationally where people don't -- where they give us the benefit of the doubt. They're still going to have
their interests, and we're going to have ours. There are going to be tough negotiations, and sometimes
we're going to have to walk away from those negotiations if we can't arrive at a common accord. There are
going to be real dangers that can't always be talked through and have to be addressed. But at least we can
start with the notion that we're prepared to listen and to work cooperatively with countries around the world.
All right, let me sprinkle in another -- it's got to be an international person. All right, this young lady right
there.
The principles that we outlined I think put in place or move us in the direction of what
I consider to be best practices, which is that there is some accountability with respect to executive
compensation.
Now, theoretically, that should be the shareholders. But the way that too many corporations have operated
for too long is that you have a CEO who basically selects his board; the board, in a fairly cozy relationship
oftentimes with the executive, hires a executive compensation firm, which, surprisingly, tends to think that
it's necessary to retain the best talent to pay people $20 or $30 million a year; and we get into the kinds of
habits and practices that I think have not been -- have not served shareholders well, I think ultimately distort
the decision-making of many CEOs.
When I was in the United States Senate, I actually worked on a piece of legislation that would -- made the
simple proposition that executive compensation should be subject to a shareholder vote, even if it was
nonbinding, so that there was transparency and accountability and perhaps a shame function that would
take place. And that principle, I think, is reflected in these guidelines.
What it says is, is that if you get shareholders involved and those shareholders are given a set of principles
and best practices by which they can judge executive compensation, then you can still have outsized
rewards and success for successful business people, but it will be based on not short-term performance, not
three-month performance, not your ability to flip quick profits off products like derivatives that don't turn out
to be particularly productive to the company, but based on sustained, effective growth. And that's what's
embodied in these documents, and I think that you're going to see a lot of countries try to encourage that
kind of transparency and accountability.
It doesn't mean the state micromanaging -- [sneezes] -- excuse me -- I've been fighting this all week -- it
doesn't mean that we want the state dictating salaries; we don't. We -- I strongly believe in a free-market
system, and as I -- as I think people understand in America, at least, people don't resent the rich; they want
to be rich. And that's good. But we want to make sure that there's mechanisms in place that holds people
accountable and produces results. Okay?
Got to go back to my crew. Jake Tapper.
In life there are no guarantees; in economics there are no guarantees. The people
who thought they could provide guarantees, many of them worked at AIG and it didn't work out so well. So
there are always risks involved.
I have no doubt, though, that the steps that have been taken are critical to preventing us sliding into a
depression. They are bolder and more rapid than any international response that we've seen to a financial
crisis in memory. And I think that they will have a concrete effect in our ability, individually, in each nation,
to create jobs, save jobs that exist, grow the economy, loosen up credit, restore trust and confidence in the
financial markets.
So these steps -- another way of putting it is I think the steps in the communiqué were necessary. Whether
they're sufficient, we've got to -- we've got to wait and see. I'm actually confident, though, that given the
common commitment in the United States and in the other G20 countries to act rapidly and boldly, that if we
see other inklings of panic in the marketplace, or things unwinding, that this group, once again, will respond
as needed.
So I guess maybe just to use an analogy that was used several times in this meeting, an analogy that I've
used in the past: You got a sick patient; I think we applied the right medicine; I think the patient is stabilized;
there's still wounds that have to heal and there's still emergencies that could arise, but I think that you've got
some pretty good care being applied.
You had a second, follow-up question?
Oh, the Washington consensus. Well, the Washington consensus, as I'm sure
you're aware, Jake, is sort of a term of art about a certain set of policies surrounding globalization and the
application of a cookie-cutter model to economic growth, trade liberalization, deregulation that was popular
and did help globalize and grow the economy, and was led by some of our leading economists and
policymakers in Washington.
I think that there's always been a spectrum of opinion about how unfettered the free market is. And along
that spectrum, I think there have been some who believe in very fierce regulation and are very suspicious of
globalization, and there are others who think that it's always -- that the market is always king. And I think
what we've learned here, but if anybody had been studying history they would have understood earlier, is
that the market is the most effective mechanism for creating wealth and distributing resources to produce
goods and services that history has ever known, but that it goes off the rail sometimes; that if it's completely
unregulated, that if there are no thoughtful frameworks to channel the creative energy of the market, that it
can end up in a very bad place.
And so, in that sense, I think that we just went through a couple of decades where there was an artificial
complacency about the dangers of markets going off the rails. And a crisis like this reminds us that we just
have to put in some common-sense rules of the road, without throwing out the enormous benefits that
globalization have brought in terms of improving living standards, reducing the cost of goods, and bringing
the world closer together.
All right, I've got time for just a couple more questions. I'm going to find a journalist here --
All right, I'm going to call on this gentleman right here. He's been very persistent.
Well, those are excellent questions. On the first question, your American
counterparts will tell you I'm terrible with those little catchphrases and sound bites. So I haven't come up
with anything catchy yet, but if you have any suggestions, let me know. I'll be happy to use them.
In terms of local politics, look, I'm the President of the United States. I'm not the President of China, I'm not
the President of Japan, I'm not the President of the other participants here. And so I have a direct
responsibility to my constituents to make their lives better. That's why they put me in there. That accounts
for some of the questions here, about how concretely does me being here help them find a job, pay for their
home, send their kids to college, live what we call the American Dream. And I will be judged by my
effectiveness in meeting their needs and concerns.
But in an era of integration and interdependence, it is also my responsibility to lead America into recognizing
that its interests, its fate is tied up with the larger world; that if we neglect or abandon those who are
suffering in poverty, that not only are we depriving ourselves of potential opportunities for markets and
economic growth, but ultimately that despair may turn to violence that turns on us; that unless we are
concerned about the education of all children and not just our children, not only may we be depriving
ourselves of the next great scientist who's going to find the next new energy source that saves the planet,
but we also may make people around the world much more vulnerable to anti-American propaganda.
So if I'm effective as America's President right now, part of that effectiveness involves holding a -- providing
Americans insight into how their self-interest is tied up with yours. And that's an ongoing project because
it's not always obvious.
And there are going to be times where short-term interests are going to differ; there's no doubt about it. And
protectionism is the classic example. You can make arguments that if you can get away with protecting
your markets, as long as the other folks don't protect theirs, then in the short term you may benefit. And it
then becomes important not only for me to try to give people a sense of why, over the long term, that's
counterproductive, but also it becomes important for me to put policies in place in the United States that
provide a cushion, provide support for those people who may suffer local dislocations because of
globalization. And that's something that I think every government has to think about.
There are individuals who will be harmed by a trade deal. There are businesses who will go out of business
because of free trade. And to the extent that a government is not there to help them reshape their company
or retrain for the new jobs that are being created, over time you're going to get people who see -- who rightly
see their personal self-interest in very narrow terms. Okay?
Two more questions. Jonathan Weisman.
Well, first of all, during the campaign I did not say that some of that loss of authority
was inevitable. I said it was traced to very specific decisions that the previous administration had made that
I believed had lowered our standing in the world. And that wasn't simply my opinion; that was, it turns out,
the opinion of many people around the world.
I would like to think that with my election and the early decisions that we've made, that you're starting to see
some restoration of America's standing in the world. And although, as you know, I always mistrust polls,
international polls seem to indicate that you're seeing people more hopeful about America's leadership.
Now, we remain the largest economy in the world by a pretty significant margin. We remain the most
powerful military on Earth. Our production of culture, our politics, our media still have -- I didn't mean to say
that with such scorn, guys -- you know I'm teasing -- still has enormous influence. And so I do not buy into
the notion that America can't lead in the world. I wouldn't be here if I didn't think that we had important
things to contribute.
I just think in a world that is as complex as it is, that it is very important for us to be able to forge
partnerships as opposed to simply dictating solutions. Just a -- just to try to crystallize the example, there's
been a lot of comparison here about Bretton Woods. "Oh, well, last time you saw the entire international
architecture being remade.
Well, if there's just Roosevelt and Churchill sitting in a room with a brandy, that's a -- that's an easier
negotiation. But that's not the world we live in, and it shouldn't be the world that we live in.
And so that's not a loss for America; it's an appreciation that Europe is now rebuilt and a powerhouse.
Japan is rebuilt, is a powerhouse. China, India -- these are all countries on the move. And that's good.
That means there are millions of people -- billions of people -- who are working their way out of poverty.
And over time, that potentially makes this a much more peaceful world.
And that's the kind of leadership we need to show -- one that helps guide that process of orderly integration
without taking our eyes off the fact that it's only as good as the benefits of individual families, individual
children: Is it giving them more opportunity; is it giving them a better life? If we judge ourselves by those
standards, then I think America can continue to show leadership for a very long time.
I'm going to call one foreigner -- actually, I'm the foreigner. That's why I smiled. One correspondent not
from America. And then I will we're not doing bidding here. But I also want to
make sure that I'm not showing gender bias. So this young lady right here -- not you, sir, I'm sorry.
I think he's a very wise and decent man, and has done a wonderful job in guiding India, even prior to being
Prime Minister, along a path of extraordinary economic growth that is a marvel, I think, for all the world.
We did discuss the issue of terrorism. And we discussed it not simply in terms of terrorism emanating from
Pakistan, although obviously we are very concerned about extremists and terrorists who have made camp
in the border regions of Pakistan as well as in Afghanistan. But we spoke about it more broadly in terms of
how we can coordinate effectively on issues of counterterrorism.
We also spoke about the fact that in a nuclear age, at a time when perhaps the greatest enemy of both India
and Pakistan should be poverty, that it may make sense to create a more effective dialogue between India
and Pakistan. But obviously we didn't go in depth into those issues.
We talked about a whole range of other issues related to, for example, energy, and how important it is for
the United States to lead by example in reducing our carbon footprint so that we can help to forge
agreements with countries like China and India that, on a per-capita basis, have a much smaller footprint
and so justifiably chafe at the idea that they should have to sacrifice their development for our efforts to
control climate change; but also acknowledging that if China and India, with their populations, had the same
energy usage as the average American, then we would have all melted by now.
And so that was a very interesting conversation that I will be pursuing not just with India, but hopefully with
China and with other countries around the world. In some ways our European counterparts have moved
more quickly than we have on this issue. But I think even the Europeans have recognized that it's not easy.
It's even harder during times of economic downturn.
And so we're going to have to combine the low-hanging fruit of energy efficiency with rapid technological
advances. And to the extent that in some cases we can get international cooperation and pool our scientific
and technical knowledge around things like developing coal sequestration, for example, that can be
extremely helpful. Okay?
I'm going to call on my last American correspondent, Chip. And, Chip, my heart goes out to you.
I think that they continue to express the desire to work with America, admiration about many things
American. There were occasional comments, usually wedged into some other topic, that indicated from
their perspective that this started in America, or this started on Wall Street, or this started with particular
banks or companies.
Perhaps what helped was my willingness to acknowledge that -- and it's hard to deny -- that some of this
contagion did start on Wall Street. And as I've said back home, as I've said in public and as I would say in
private, we had a number of firms that took wild and unjustified risks, we had regulators that were asleep at
the switch, and it has taken an enormous toll on the U.S. economy and has spread to the world economy.
Now, I think that part of the reason people didn't give me too hard a time is because if you look at European
banks or Asian banks, that they've had their own issues both in the past and in the future. And I think there
was a very constructive discussion about the fact that, given global financial flows, that unless we've got
much more effective coordinated regulatory strategies, supervision, standards, that these problems will
appear again.
Money is -- can move around the globe in a second. And it will seek out the highest returns, and if those
highest returns end up being built on a house of cards, then we're going to be seeing another threat to the
world financial system wherever that house of cards might be.
And so, overall, I think there was an extraordinarily constructive approach among all the leaders. I was very
impressed with them. I'm very grateful to them. And I'm excited about the ability not just to help heal this
economy but also to make progress on a sustainable model of economic growth that relies less on a cycle
of bubble and bust -- something that I've spoken about back home.
All right? Thank you, everybody. Appreciate it.
